Appendix

 

Zampanô produced a great deal of material outside of The Navidson Record. Here’s a selection of journal entries, poems and even a letter to the editor, all of which I think sheds a little more light on his work as well as his personality. — JT.

A.

 

Outlines & Chapter Titles

The Navidson Record

 

Intro

	1/4”

	Tom

	The Five and a Half Minute Hallway

	Exploration A (Navidson’s Visit)

 

Exploration #1 (Across the Anteroom)

	Exploration #2 (To the Great Hall)

	Exploration #3 (Seven hours down the Spiral Staircase)

	Exploration #4

	SOS

		Into The Maze

		Rescue

		(Tom’s Story)

		The Falling Quarter

		The Holloway Tape

	Evacuation

 

	“What Some Have Thought” [*—Not included in final release.]

	“A Brief History Of How [sic] I Love”

	The Reston Interview

	The Last Interview

	Exploration #5

	The End

 

 

 

 

Release History

 

1990 — “The Five and a Half Minute Hallway” (VHS Short)

	1991 — “Exploration #4” (VHS Short)

	1993 — The Navidson Record

 

 

 

Possible Chapter Titles

 

Chapter I … … … . The Film

	Chapter II … … … . 1/4”

	Chapter III … … … . Outpost

	Chapter IV … … … . Navidson

	Chapter V … … … . Echo

	Chapter VI … … … . Animals

	Chapter VII … … … . Holloway

	Chapter VII … … … . SOS

	Chapter IX … … … . The Labyrinth

	Chapter X … … … . The Rescue (Part One)

	Chapter XI … … … . Tom’s Story

	Chapter XII … … … . The Rescue (Part Two)

	Chapter XIII … … … . The Minotaur

Chapter XIV … … … . Infidelity

	Chapter XV … … … . Karen

	Chapter XVI … … … . Science

	Chapter XVII … … … . Reasons

	Chapter XVIII … … … . Ftaires! or De la Waif or The History of Ash Tree Lane

	Chapter XIX … … … . Delial

	Chapter XX … … … . The Return

	Chapter XXI … … … . Nightmares

	Chapter XXII … … … . Faith

	Chapter XXIII … … … . Passion

B.

 

Bits

[Original ]

[432—Presumably “Original” indicates an entry written in Zampanô’s own hand, while “A” “B” “C” etc., etc. indicate entries written by someone else. — Ed.]

January 18, 1955

	I do not know anything about Art with a capital A. What I do know about is my art. Because it concerns me. I do not speak for others. So I do not speak for things which profess to speak for others. My art, however, speaks for me. It lights my way.

 

 

 

[Original]

April 17, 1955

 

	Then are inhabited by history?

 

 

 

[Original]

September 4, 1955

	Light dawns and marble heads. What the hell does this mean?

 

 

 

[Original]

June 3, 1959

	This terror that hunts.

 

 

 

[Typed]

August 29, 1960

	Captain Kittinger, you brought us an early fall this year.

 

 

 

[Typed]

October 31, 1968

	I have no words. The finest cenotaph.

 

 

 

[Typed]

November 1, 1968

	     (o)       (n)

	A sun to read the dark.

 

 

 

[Typed]

November 2, 1968

	Tirer comme des lapins. [433— “Shot like rabbits.” — Ed.]

 

 

 

[Original]

December 8, 1968

	God grant me distraction.

 

 

 

 

[B]

March 14, 1969

	Who has never killed an hour? Not casually or without thought, but carefully: a premeditated murder of minutes. The violence comes from a combination of giving up, not caring, and a resignation that getting past it is all you can hope to accomplish. So you kill the hour. You do not work, you do not read, you do not daydream. If you sleep it is not because you need to sleep. And when at last it is over, there is no evidence: no weapon, no blood, and no body. The only clue might be the shadows beneath your eyes or a terribly thin line near the corner of your mouth indicating something has been suffered, that in the privacy of your life you have lost something and the loss is too empty to share.

 

 

 

[C]

September 10, 1970

	Nothing to share with.

 

 

 

[Typed]

September 21, 1970

	Perhaps in the margins of darkness, I could create a son who is not missing; who lives beyond even my own imagination and invention; whose lusts, stupidities, and strengths carry him farther than even he or I can anticipate; who sees the world for what it is; and consequently bears the burden of everyone’s tomorrow with unprecedented wisdom and honor because he is one of the very few who has successfully interrogated his own nature. His shields are instantly available though seldom used. And those who value him shall prosper while those who would destroy him shall perish. He will fulfill a promise I made years ago but failed to keep.

 

 

 

[Typed ]

December 15, 1974

	As often as I have lingered on Hudson in his shallop, I have in the late hours turned my thoughts to Quesada and Molino’s journey across those shallow waters, wondering aloud what they said, what they thought, what gods came to keep them or leave them, and what in those dark waves they finally saw of themselves? Perhaps because history has little to do with those minutes, the scene survives only in verse: The Song of Quesada and Molino by [XXXX]. I include it here in its entirety.

 

 

 

[D]

April 29, 1975

	Mother wants you to call home STOP It is 105 degrees and rising STOP White Christmas indeed!

 

	Bada-Bing, Bada-Bang, Bada-Gone!

 

	Bing! Bang! Booooom!

 

 

 

[Typed]

February 11, 1984

	Is it possible to love something so much, you imagine it wants to destroy you only because it has denied you?

 

 

 

[E]

August 4, 1985

	I dream of vampires. I dream of god. I dream of no vampires. I dream of no god. I dream of nothing. And yet that too is still my dream.

 

 

 

[F]

May 2, 1988

	The angel of his youth became the devil of his maturity. He went out with women when he was young, always holding something in reserve. There would always be a reason to break it off, which opened the door to a multitude of relationships. Heaven. Or so he thought. As age encroached upon his sensibilities and form, he longed for something with enough vitality to endure. But the covering cherub of his Lothario days had stayed with him and was no longer so angelic. It haunted him, guarded him, kept him from intimacy, promising the ash dry glory of so many toppling relationships, toppling like dominos, one after another, ad infinitum, or at least until he died.

 

 

 

[G]

August 30, 1988

	“He wanted to go to bed with her immediately, pull the sheets around them, dig his toes into the mattress, her heals pushing against his calves, her fingers running rivers along his sides. But these days fantasies flourish and die like summer flies.”

 

 

 

[Typed]

March 18, 1989

	A maze. Amazing maze. A maze meant… What did it mean? A May zing perhaps. M.A.s in the bush or amidst the maize. Quite amazing huh? Not to wony I am not that impressed either but grant an old man a chance to play.

 

 

 

[H]

February 8, 1990

	It stinks here. I know what stink is and it stinks here. Cat piss, rotting fruit, moldy bread. Something. I am certain that girl is at fault. She must not have taken the garbage out. She can read (I will find out soon if she can transcribe) and she can flirt. But I wager she has failed to take the garbage out. I should get rid of her. I should take it out myself. I hate garbage. It stinks. I should throw it out myself. I should throw it all out.

 

 

 

[I]

October 11, 1990

	Incomplete. Syllables to describe a life. Any life.

	I cannot even discuss Günter Nitschke or Norberg-Schulz. I merely wanted Glas (Paris: Editions Galilee, 1974). That is all. But the bastards reply it is unavailable. Swine. All of them. Swine. Swine. Swine.

	Mr. Leavey, Jr. and of course Mr. Rand will have to do.

 

 

 

[I]

April 22, 1991

	An atrocity sinking into waters of darkness; without order or bars of earth; where light must mean shadow and reason dies in the hold:

 

	((((((((((((Jonah in the belly of the beast))))))))))))

 

 

 

[I]

May 3, 1991

	Stars to live by. Stars to steer by. Stars to die by.

 

 

 

[I]

May 26, 1991

	Kutch Dekta?

	Kutch Nahin, Sahib.

 

 

 

[I]

May 30, 1991

	Do not wake me from this slumber, but be assured that just as I have wept much, I have also wandered many roads with my thoughts. Reminiscent of another film by my eye fell in. Aye.

 

 

 

[J ]

June 30, 1991

	Goddamn! Goddamn, Goddamn it! Goddamn! Goddamn!

	God Damn! Yes, of course write it down! Write all of it down!

	Everything I say! Every goddamn word! Goddamn! Capital 0!

	Goddamn it all! All of it, every last word. Goddamn her wrong!

 

 

 

[J]

July 27, 1991

	Make no mistake, those who write long books have nothing to say. Of course those who write short books have even less to say.

 

 

 

[K]

August 7, 1992

	How did I end up here? I know of course. I am referring to the itinerary I followed. But that hardly helps me understand the whys any better. I still walk out into that dusty courtyard and stand amazed, amazed that I should have ended up stuck in such a shithole, then I think to myself “Not only did you end up here, you are going to die here too!” Of course Hollywood is the land of the blind with churches for the blind so in my case it makes a certain sense. You think I am bitter about being here, yes? You think I am bitter about this grave I live in and that bed of weeds I scratch around in? You think I am bitter about dying? What do you know? You know nothing about bitterness because you know nothing about love. Get out. Get out! No, stay. Please stay. Let us read something. Forget everything I just said. It is not so bad. I am just old and you know a good deal about love and I would like to think I know something more because of my age. Let us read something.

 

 

 

[M]

April 3, 1992

	Walls black like black waters when they are heavy and seem to belong to other seas.

 

 

 

[M]

December 3,1992

	Why can I sleep no more?

 

 

 

[N]

May 7, 1993

	The house is history and history is uninhabited.

 

 

 

[O]

June 19, 1994

	Prometheus, thief of light, giver of light, bound by the gods, must have been a book.

 

 

 

[O]

November 11, 1994

	Defend a stray’s hun? Never used the word. Never will.

 

 

 

[P: Written in the margin

of the December

15, 1974 entry.]

April 3, 1995

	“Forgive me please for including this. An old man’s mind is just as likely to wander as a young man’s, but where a young man will forgive the stray, an old man will cut it out. Youth always tries to fill the void, an old man learns to live with it. It took unlearn the fortunes found in a swerve. Perhaps this is no news to you-but then I have killed many men and I have both legs and I don’t think I ever quite equaled the-bald gnome Error who comes from his cave with featherless ankles to feast on the mighty dead. [173]

 

 

 

[U]

April 9, 1996

	Paralipomena. n. From ME f. ecci. L f. GK paraleipomena f. PARA (It. imper. of parare defend) (leipo leave) omit.

 

 

 

[X]

October 2, 1996

	All of which is pretty senseless without the beautiful light of Ruskin’s Seven Lamps of Architecture. Oh, what is the use?

 

 

 

[Typed]

December 18, 1996

	The cats have been dying and everyone wonders why. I can hear my neighbors murmur. They murmur all the time: “It’s strange. Some cats die, some just disappear. No one knows why…”

	Redwood. I saw him once a long time ago when I was young. I ran away and luckily, or no luck at all, he did not follow me. But now I cannot run and anyway this time I am certain he would follow.

 

 

 

[Typed]

December 21, 1996

	Explanation is not half as strong as experience but experience is not half as strong as experience and understanding.

 

 

 

[Original]

December 23, 1996

	I took my morning walk, I took my evening walk, I ate something, I thought about something, I wrote something, I napped and dreamt something too, and with all that something, I still have nothing because so much of sum’things has always been and always will be you.

	I miss you.

C.

 

… and Pieces

D.

 

Letter to the Editor

“Seeing’s Believing But Feeling’s Probably Best!”

 

 

 

September 17, 1978

 

 

In last week’s article on collectibles, you reported that a man by the name of Kuellster had several World War II Ithaca Model 37 Trench guns for sale. As shotgun aficionados are well aware, this weapon is a rare find as only 1,420 were ever produced.

 

Fortunately, the WWII Model 37 offers several distinguishing characteristics, including bottom loading, handy shell ejection similar to the Remington Model 10, a commercial blue finish, and standard sling swivels. It also bears some important martial markings: a small “p” on the left side of the barrel; a flaming bomb and the letters RLB (inspector Lt. Col. Roy L. Bowlin’s initials) on the left side of the receiver. Kuellster’s guns, however, all have a parkerized finish, lack swing swivels, and while there is a small letter proof “p” on the barrel, there is also one printed on the receiver.

 

All of which proves that Kuellster’s shotguns, while Ithaca 37s, were produced long after the World War 11 Trench guns he is currently and falsely selling them as.

 

On a personal note, I wish to add that as I have been blind for over two decades, I had to determine most of this by feel. Unfortunately when I presented my conclusion to Kuelister, he demonstrated his unparalleled probity by ordering a security guard to escort “this intoxicated indigent” from his store. I suppose in his world if a recently manufactured Ithaca 37 is the same as the WWII model, gingerale must pass for bourbon.

 

Sincerely,

Zampanô

Venice, CA

 

 

 

Our apologies to Mr. Zampanô and all other collectors who due to our article visited Mr.

Kuellsrer ‘s store. Mr. Kuellster no longer claims to have any WWII Ithaca Model 37s for sale and refuses to comment on anything he might have previously suggested to our reporters.

— The Los Angeles Herald-Examiner

E.

 

The Song of Quesada and Molino

The Song of Quesada and Molino

 

[434—Missing. — Ed.]

F.

 

Poems

That Place

 

Summer broke on the backs of children,

	even though swings performed miracles

	and breezes sang psalms.

 

	For that summer, from the outskirts

	of some far off even whimsical place

	came the low resolute moo of a dragon.

 

	A child, of course, could not recognize that fabled moo

or the serpentine tail close to her feet,

	wound up among the thistle and milkweed like a hose.

 

	Nor for that matter could she recognize

	the starry white bone left upright in the sandbox

like some remarkable claw

	or shovel.

 

	Not when the sun was out and games continued.

Certainly not when there was summer love

and rootbeer.

 

	But at dusk when the fog crept in,

	thick and sweating,

	suggesting some kind of burning far off,

	down over there,

 

	(where someone once saw two eyes

 

	— pale as October moons —

 

	blink)

 

	a child could know the meaning

	of fall.

 

	And that August, two weeks before school began,

some children went down to that place

 

	and they never came back.

 

 

 

The Panther

The panther paces.

 

	Waiting reminds him that clarity is painful

but his pain is unreadable,

	obscure, chiaroscuro to their human senses.

 

	In time they will misread his gait,

	his moon mad eyes,

	the almost gentle way his tail caresses the bars.

 

	In time they will mistake him

	for something else—

	without history,

	without the shadow of being,

	a creature without the penance of living.

 

	They will read only his name.

 

	They will be unable to perceive

	what strangeness

	lies beneath his patience.

 

	Patience is the darkest side of power.

 

	He is dark.

	He is black.

	He is exquisitely powerful.

 

	He has made pain his lover

	and hidden her completely.

 

	Now he will never forget.

 

	She will give birth to memories

	they believe he has been broken of.

 

	He smells the new rain,

	tastes its change.

 

	His claw skates along

	the cold floor.

 

	Love curled up and died

	on such a floor.

 

	He blinks.

	Clarity improves.

 

	He hears other creatures scream and fade.

But silence is his.

 

	He knows.

 

	In time the gates will open.

	In time his heart will open.

 

	Then the shadows will bleed

	and the locks will break.

 

 

 

Love At First Sight

 

Natasha, I love you

	despite knowing love is more

than seeing you.

 

 

 

(Untitled Fragment)

	The angles of your wrists

preserve a certain mystery,

unknown by any lips

	or written down in history.

 

	To measure their degree

	would solve the oldest questions —

providence and alchemy

	answered in your gestures.

 

	But god and gold will never rival

the way your fingers curl.

They hold my breath’s arrival

like a rare and undiscovered pearl.

 

 

 

(Untitled Fragment)

 

	There is only a black fence

	and a wide field and a barn of Wyeth red.

 

	The smell of anger chokes the air.

	Ravens of September rain descend.

 

	Some say a mad mad hermit man lived here

	talking to himself and the woodchuck.

 

	But he’s gone. No reason. No sense.

	He just wandered off one day,

	past the onions, past the fence.

 

	Forget the letters. Forget love.

 

	Troy is nothing more than

	a black finger of charcoal

	frozen in lake ice.

 

	And near where the owl watches

	and the old bear dreams,

 

	the parapet of memory burns to the ground

	taking heaven with it.

 

 

 

(Untitled Fragment)

 

	Little solace comes

	to those who grieve

	when thoughts keep drifting

as walls keep shifting

	and this great blue world of ours

seems a house of leaves

 

	moments before the wind.

 

 

 

La Feuille

 

Mes durs réves formels sauront te chevaucher

Mon destm au char d’or sera ton beau rocher

Qui pour rênes tiendra tendus a frénéie

Mes vers, les parangons de toute poesie.

—Apollinaire

 

	C’etait l’automne. C’était l’automne et c’était la saison de la guerre. Te souviens-tu de la guerre? Moi, de moms en moms. Mais je me souviens de l’automne. Je vois encore les brouillards sur les prés a côté de la maison, et, au-delà, les chênes silencieux dans le crépuscule. Les feuilles étaient tombées depuis septembre. Elles brunissaient et m’évocaient alors l’esprit de ma jeunesse, et aussi I’esprit du temps.

	Souventj’allais au bois. Je traversais les prés et je me perdais pour longtemps au-dessous des branches, dans les ombres, parmi les feuilles. Une fois, avant d’entrer dans le bois, je me souviens qu’il y avait un cheval noir qui me fixait de loin. II était au fond du petit champ. J’imaginais qu’il me regardait, alors que probablement il dormait. Pourquoi pense-je maintenant a ce cheval? Je ne sais pas. Peut-être pour Ia même raison je pense a tous ces mots j’ai écrit au même temps.

	J’ai garde la feuille oü j’avais note tout ce qui m’etait venu a l’esprit. A l’époque, je croyais qu’ils m’appartenaient, mais maintenant je sais que j’avais tort. A chaque fois que je les relis, je vois que je copiais seulement ce que quelqu’un m’avait raconté.

	—N’aie pas peur. Je ne m’arrêterai pas. Je dois découvrir cette clairière. Et je ne m’arrêterai pas tant que je ne l’aurais pas trouvée. Sais-tu ce qui me pousse a la chercher? Eh bien… personne. Ma femme est morte. Ma femme, ma flue et mon fils sont tous morts. Te souviens-tu comment us sont morts? Moi, de moms en moms. Je ne me souviens que du temps. Mes blessures ne sont plus mortelles, mais j’ai peur. J’ai peur de ne pas trouver cette clairière.

	Je suis resté quelque temps a regarder les ombres, les feuilles et les branches. Ensuite, quand j’ai quitté le bois, je ne voyais que le brouillard autour de moi. Je ne pouvais voir ni la maison, ni les prés, seulement le brouillard. Et bien sür, le cheval noir avait disparu.

 

— [illegible]

 

 

 

You Shall Be My Roots

 

You shall be my roots and

	I will be your shade,

	though the sun burns my leaves.

 

	You shall quench my thirst and

	I will feed you fruit,

	though time takes my seed.

 

		And when I’m lost and can tell nothing of this earth

		you will give me hope.

 

		And my voice you will always hear.

		And my hand you will always have.

 

	For I will shelter you.

	And I will comfort you.

	And even when we are nothing left,

	not even in death,

	I will remember you.