Appendix II

 

	Due to the unexpected number of inquiries regarding the first edition, Mr. Truant agreed for this edition to provide the following additional material.

— The Editors

A.

 

Sketches & Polaroids

B.

 

The Pelican Poems

A Palimpsest of Austere Pelican Jake

	Prospero dreams

	‘twixt green sea and azur’d vault

	setting war

	while the corner clock ticks

	in the evening den.

	“Charlotte. Charlotte.

	The moments here are short

	and I am mad.”

	(mutinous waves usurp the land)

	dear God

	here?

	and raising a sun struck hand —

	yes here

	again.

— For Claudia. New Haven.

May 26, 1988

 

 

 

Pelican Considers a Cha-Cha with a Long Island  Ice Tea In Hand

	Mr. Jake misplaced his armor.

	And how the wind whistles through,

	“A swell of thought,

	the tumescence of a moment,

	only that, but…?”

	A father tossed in that

	storm

	with iron cufflinks

	cut by Cain.

	“We hesitate in chance”

	But Pelican’s begun now

	—Avatar

	Pelican’s begun his occluded dance.

— Left at Klub Restauracja. Warsaw.

July 6, 1988

 

 

 

Pelican Jake on the Eurydice School Bus

	We hold our dreams

	in lost dreams

	and tear our hearts out

	over chance.

	“She carried the songs

	of centuries”

	and in her passing

	my madness

	passed.

— For the waitress at Cafe

Wilanowska. Warsaw July 7, 1988

 

 

 

Pelican’s Pen

	A jinx of ink,

	Lo the star!

	All is chance,

	nothing planned—

	only the will

	these words command.

— For Marek. Warsaw.

July 7, 1988

 

 

 

Pelican’s Juvenile Metempsychosis

	Will you steal from this blind man

	When I would give you all.

	I stumbled when I saw,

	but Gloucester was never

	this far gone.

	I see feelingly and at

	this height there is only

	so much fall.

	Alex brought him back

	with a light tap on the glass

	and then lighting a match,

	“Romeo or is it Lear tonight”

— Left at another Warsaw cafe.

July 8, 1988

 

 

 

Pelican’s Cocktail Mythology

	Three muse

	over an elegant ruse

	concerning a lingual wall

	which only I can pass

	over.

	Their eyes are beautiful

	and plans wild

	and laughter unconcerned.

	“You’re at it again”

	“Yes, on a high sea wall,

	yes at it again.”

— For a beautiful three at a Warsaw hostel.

July 8, 1988

 

 

 

Pelican’s Religious Ruminations

	One forgets

	that one is one.

	I rnust try

	to

	remember this.

— [illegible) Warsaw.

July 9, 1988

 

 

 

Pelican’s Promontory Dance

	Hyperion curls

	have you consulted

	the plans for these whirls?

	We seldom know the pattern.

	though that never matters,

	not if you know the notes.

	I’ve forgotten.

	I can’t hear.

— On behalf of a Warsaw Lady who showed me I couldn’t dance.

July 10, 1988

 

 

 

Pelican Misunderstanding a Portentous Sign

	Future pens

	and wars with feathered knights,

	The drumming thunder,

	the azured lights,

	rising In these eyes.

	Do you hear?

	“It’s Patter Sir.

	He’s in the back,

	knocking at the gate.”

	And the warlord’s fatter

	(Pelican’s cat)

	mewing for his milk.

	And all now is thunder

	for the lightning has passed.

— For Anna. Krakow

July 10, 1988

 

 

 

Pelican’s Worrisome Wake

	A semiotic Eliotic dream

	with Proust bumbling around unread

	—an intuitive guess

	commands awake.

	Sledgehammer harmony

	played deceptively right

	in this non cadence.

	“They’ve taken the beat away”

	And Patter and Quisling said she’d

	raise the union from the sea

	and be Hawthorne bread.

	This is the way the world ends

	Not with a bang but an alarm clock.

	The mewer lands with a comforting glance:

	There now you know this game.

— For Zbyszek. Poland.

July 15, 1988

 

 

 

On the Lining Brim of Being Brow Shy

	In a rage of questions again

	this preponderance over a dumb show

	and Quisling and Easle peckering

	it out over their own

	running conversation,

	he found this at Petitgas 1857

	in the lock of a heart

	and a disabled cardboard box.

	There’s the chance of the thing.

	There’s the design.

	“Fashion I believe is only right

	when meant for the right time.”

— For the owner of the Pentgas hat store. Copenhagen.

July 20, 1988

 

 

 

The Still Concordance of a Summertime Memory or Gaze—Whatever You Will

	Easle, clairvoyant,

	intruding with rapacious gab

	harkens nevertheless

	with a pique ear

	on Pelican’s semanteme arrangement:

	It’s a colored chord

	(not necessarily a mauve word)

	‘A flute piping on a

	Hamburg corner and tarnished

	slightly too.”

	Pelican admires the

	gate of the idea

	and as Basic passes by

	he forwards a hand-

	“There, it should be there.”

	And he knows that that will

	hold for at least a little while.

— For Katharina the flute player. Hamburg. July 22, 1988

 

 

 

The Present 1815 Calamity of Conscience

	Rise the brobdingnag

	to the Lion’s ballpawed fair

	where,

	If all accords to plan

	Warlord Waterloo will claw

	the hem with grace.

	“I trembled at the sound

	of footsteps, my conscience

	turned aghast:

	Melonbrick returning?”

	Stavishly amok running

	at the mouth: Pelican thinks

	ce champ sinistre

	la fuite des geants.

	Come now cats and mice

	will play

	(and scamper exceedingly loud

	down the hail)

	Infidels of thought

	blinder than,

	o yes much much blinder than

	bats.

— For Said in Bruxelles.

July 25, 1988

 

 

 

Melonology On A Melon

	Is this melon right

	Pelican demanded

	of himself.

	Indeed it seems to

	hold the curve,

	seems right in the palm

	(How would Easle read?)

	It reminds me

	of sorry days in Spain.

	Funny they didn’t

	have melons there.

— Written on a melon. Paris.

July 26, 1988

 

 

 

When Unguarded Thoughts Returned Over Breakfast

	—He needs to eat

	and so opens the fridge to retrieve

	along with bread

	a brick of butter.

— [illegible). Paris,

July 26, 1988

 

 

 

Pelican Transpires By His Cup of Tea and Decides to Try His Hand at Conjuring

	Is the ambiance of style

	elegant ambivalence?

	“There” sighed Patter

	and Pelican felt an

	easing away.

	He relished the thought

	He turned over the thought

	He gave it up,

	and in an evening dress

	she appeared behind his

	dosing eyes.

— For Lucy in Carcassonne.

August 3, 1988

 

 

 

An Elegant Prancing of an Indolent Pale Over Revision

	Ragged and towed

	in a misfortunate

	step,

	torn to a spindoil

	in returning a [illegible]

	[illegible)

	the alteration:

	“Grammatical metempsychosis”

	[illegible]

	though Pelican claims

	he saw more through that [illegible]

	behind the matador’s cape.

— For Becky after a bullfight in Madrid. August 7, 1988

 

 

 

The Stave Principle in Regards to Pelican’s Principles—Or Something Like That

	A criminal’s attention

	is Stave’s at hand gestures

	for intimidation

	when it comes to questions

	of personal and inter-personal

	balance.

	“I’ve gone to the edge

	and found I could do more

	than just peer over.”

	And he blinks like Waterloo

	(slowly now)

	while ahead of the game

	Pelican wonders if

	he could think that way.

	If he could relish closure.

	Does Stave stall?

	Is tomorrow’s wonder

	only yesterday’s remembrance?

	Pelican discovers himself annoyed.

— Left at the Peraz Hostel in Madrid.

August 11, 1988

 

 

 

The Ploy That Put Syllabic Stress Differentiation Over art

	Pelican stuttered

	for stuttering is the

	hindrance of speech

	and Pelican stuttered on purpose

	because that’s what he wanted to do

	—to hinder.

	“You’re a wretch” Easle said, placing

	a hair on her palm.

	Stave felt completely annoyed

	by the intention.

	Pelican continued on

	and in between enjoyments

	he fragmented letters

	like he fragmented his friend’s

	sense.

— For Stefan in Toledo.

August 11, 1988

 

 

 

October’s Tapestry Sale

	Perhaps there’s the stitch

	potential to consider —

	Quisling’s adjournment

	(which follows)

	reflects his invariant gate

	—from Pelican’s perspective

	you understand.

	“Get to the remount and

	head south and settle east.”

	Quisling loses himself with a compass,

	a fault of antiquated polarities

	when he was young.

	Pelican shreds away at it all.

	But it’s nothing new

	Quisling is history’s name,

— For strangers met on a train to Nice.

July 26, 1988

 

 

 

The Wednesday Which Pelican Mistook to be a Sunday and Caused Easle to Lose her Cards

	Amuck in annular thoughts

	reminiscent of mango tree roots—

	“Are these circular?”

	“They are from my angle”

	and mango tree roots sound—

	Pelican confounds his own imagination

	by trying transubstantiation

	on the evening sea tide

	rising inside his morning cup.

	Easle throws her tarots

	and with hanging men and a spotted moon up In the air

	commands a Taxi uptown.

	The driver grins ala St. John.

	“O Pelican

	(portentously or pre..replete)

	—the turning forms what,

	a bird, a plane, no…

	the paraclete?”

— Sent to [illegible].

August 1, 1988

 

 

 

Pelican’s Ratiocination of Erring Recurrence In Correspondence He just Left Behind

	With forgetful ease

	the forgotten tease

	of shapeless days

	pass by

	and I feel them hesitate

	sometimes

	and whisper their concordance

	of slight gestures in glass.

	They are mine

	and drift still with the irregularity

	of wine and doors

	in constructed mythologies

	of evening reflections

	long since gone by.

— For Johanna in Rome.

August 14, 1988

 

 

 

Singing Lesson When Beethoven Caine to Stroll

	The colors steal

	a glimpse of praise

	and subdue orchestrated humor

	with tropes.

	“I have forgotten to read.”

	Easle is annoyed with the tricode stitching on a courtesan’s hem—the outlay see.

	‘And when I learned to read again

	what I read wasn’t what I’d read

	before.”

	Pelican’s not listening, only

	watching the pastoral

	unfold in shades of

	plaid.

— For a Dutch girl wearing a

Fransican cross who spoke Italian

with a southern accent. She gave

me a sandwich on a train to

Brindisi. August 15, 1988

 

 

When the Excavation Proffered up a Pause and at Twenty To the Angel Passed Right By

	Here in the scape

	of trumpeters poised

	before a curfew of miracles

	we collide into a communal tonic

	of words, of silence.

	“Well” and she said more

	than well, but this is the getting around,

	the circling Bacchanal in four time,

	The wine has dropped to the cloth:

	one season

	two seasons

	three reasons

	(There is not time enough to count all

	the

	way)

	sounds the chorus

	sounds Pelican

	sounds the notes that brought a

	wall of conversation tumbling down.

— For Claire. Paxos, Greece.

August 20, 1988

 

 

 

The Parable (I)

	It’s fortunate

	you laughed

	because I would have lost

	my way.

	These are the notes recorded

	These are the lines reflecting

	what one evening had to say

	to another.

	“1 walk, see

	and 1 believe a gentleman

	passes by

	and what catches my eye

	are his cufflinks.

	He is my brother. He is my father.”

	This, a Pelican inmate declared,

	is the way.

— For a Captain. Greece.

August 23, 1988

 

 

 

The Reason (II)

	Your place is secured.

	So the promise.

	So Jacob’s death.

	But the line hasn’t decided

	your name.

	Skip. Skip.

	Daily-ho. Esau.

	“Sold” cried the blackfaced man

	with a tarnished gavel,

	and two men went forth to retrieve

	what Pelican deemed to be the ugliest

	phonograph he’d ever seen.

	“k’s an Edison”

	And so itwas.

	And so that name also had something

	to do with currents

	—right?

— For the Captain’s wife. Greece.

August 23, 1988

 

 

 

The Lie (III)

	Heavy, heavy blues

	are absinthe for me

	tonight.

	“It’s the notes

	and the black and white photographs

	with tattered edges

	that go together so well

	—Don’t you think so?—

	with brass.”

	“You’re lost.”

	“I know”

	“Again.”

	“Again.”

	Putting out his hat

	Pelican catches a coin

	and delights in the fact

	that it’s not brass but gold:

	could be turned into a cufflink

	or could be used to buy something.

	Though to tell you the truth

	there never really was any coin

	nor for that matter a hat,

— For Spiros and Tatiana. Greece.

August 23, 1988

 

 

 

Human light gone from Human light at dawn

	Does pain

	always human bolt the door,

	misunderstanding

	the difference between untouched nerves and hollowness?

	Perhaps, for instance,

	Pelican’s afraid.

	(it happens)

	The matter he claims

	is that there’s no one

	“for all to see no one”

	can’t see

	can’t hear

	can’t find

	But I still can feel this,

	all of this,

	like an ulcer in the gut.

— For a waitress in Athens.

August 25, 1988

 

 

 

The Price of the Tenement having, to do with

Previous Questions having to do with

Residence.

	The complaint had to do

	with whether or not

	Pelican was a uxorious man,

	“As if that were a question

	that played by the rules of today.”

	“And what,” inquired a fiendish Stave,

	seeking perhaps to catch

	a contradiction.

	“What are those?”

	Yesterday’s fools

	for historical fiction

	who rent my palms.

	But there is always renting

	and ravings

	and various degrees to saving

	and Pelican knows

	he never really rented.

	He just bought outright.

— For a young French woman. Mycenac, Greece.

August 28, 1988

 

 

 

The Inner Whisper of Breezes Brushing over Fields of Color

	The catechism

	followed a violent protest

	which followed the innocent expression of a wandering idea.

	Easle refused to tell its

	nature but did end up saying—

	“Now that, that is an unforgivable trick.”

	The commotion mounted, Zenethic in climate,

	leaving the sane

	wonderfully disparate.

	Meanwhile Pelican intended to go

	on a mild wandering through

	colorful weeds,

	but the weeds were

	tinder alight in his eyes

	and God what a formidable

	headache.

	What will I do?

— For a French man in Mycenae.

August 28, 1988

 

 

The Principle that Swung—Rocking Back

and Forth—Like a Bead on a String—Hung

Between Paintings

	The price failed to respect

	the effect

	that four flat bills

	two flat gold coins

	along with three smaller

	copper ones

	had on the counter.

	“Pelican turn off the lamp”

	and he clicked off

	the fortyfive watt bulb

	used for reading,

	for lighting his way.

	“Shakespeare’s troublesome.

	Why Why simply because

	when I was young I couldn’t understand.

	I never knew what was going on.”

—For another French man in

Mycenae. August 28, 1988

 

 

 

A Pelican Wish

	The ruminations are mine,

	let

	the world

	be yours.

— For no one, Olympia, Greece.

August 31, 1988

 

 

 

Before Him reuniting story lines he never knew but was freshly told of then

	The passing promise

	was just an eyeful glance

	promising just that —

	and I saw more,

	usually do —

	the kept oblation

	for razor’d sight —

	“I really believe you’re

	shredding boundaries”

	The light.

	Dear Elihu,

	Just wondered if you might

	reconstruct some wisdom

	regarding the journeyman’s decision.

	But another journeyman’s passage

	cut the scape and

	broke Pelican quickly

	with a genuine

	embrace,

— For Camille at the Youth Hostel.

Naples, Italy. September 2, 1988

 

 

 

More than a café —un vent d’eau

	If there were a clue worth holding onto it was the nail,

	the strongest point that alone,

	at first,

	fixed and recreated,

	the house.

	But Pelican was not a detective

	and did not follow the process.

	His eyes were old and full

	and after all the house

	his friends had spoken of

	still stood.

	He tapped his fingers playfully

	on the wall

	—tap! tap! tap!

	He smiled a bit.

	It seemed right to him,

	not at long last

	but right along the way.

	‘Where I’ve been.

	Where 1 am,’

	he said and then sighing

	added—

	“I’d like to return one day

	if only for a little while

	to drink something warm.”

— Le Clou Dc Paris. Rue Danton, Paris.

August 12, 1990

C.

 

Collages

#1

#2

D.

 

Obituary

 

 

	At Mr. Truant’s request, we have omitted the last name of his father as well as several other details.

— The Editors

Local pilot, Donnie ____________, died last Sunday on route — when the Mack truck he was in swerved into a ditch and caught tire. Reportedly the driver, who survived, had fallen asleep at the wheel.

	Throughout his life, Mr. ___________ was a dedicated flier. As R. William Notes said of his friend, “Donnie always seemed most at home in the sky.”

	Born in Dorset, Vermont on ________ 19___, Mr. __________l family soon moved to Marietta, Ohio where he graduated from ________ high school. After a stint in the Air Force, he worked for several years as a crop duster in Nebraska, a mail carrier in Alaska, and for one winter flew a spotter plane off the coast of Norway. Eventually, he took a job as a commercial pilot for American Airlines, though on time off, he enjoyed performing aerial stunts in regional shows.

	Late last year, Mr. ________ decided to take a job as a pilot for ______________ in order to spend more time with his family. Tragically, during the standard physical examination, doctors discovered he had unknowingly suffered some time ago—probably in his sleep — a cardiac infarction. The results were sent to Oklahoma where the FAA voted to suspend his AT? license for six months, pending further evaluation. No longer able to earn an income as a pilot, Mr. ____________ sought work at a trucking company.

	He is survived by his wife, _____________, and one son, ___________.

 

— The ________ - Herald, July , 1981

E.

 

The Three Attic Whalestoe Institute Letters

 

 

	Mr. Truant wished to make known that though some names here were not deleted many were changed.

— The Editors

July 28, 1982

 

	My dear child,

	Your mother is here, not altogether here, but here nonetheless. It has been a tough year for her but no doubt a tougher one for you.

	The Director tells me you have a foster family now. Open your heart to them. They are there for you. They will help you recover from your father’s untimely death. They will also help you comprehend the reasons for my stay here.

	Remember your mother loves you, despite her crumbling biology. Also remember, love inhabits more than just the heart and mind. If need be it can take shelter in a big toe.

A big toe for you then.

I love you.

Mommy

 

 

 

August 30, 1982

	My dear child,

	Another family already? That’s fine. I’m told you worked yourself up into quite a fit, throwing things and making a general mess of your room. That’s fine too. It pays in this world to play out your passions.

	Have no fear, you will find your way. It’s in your bones. It’s in your soul. Your father had it. Your mother has it (in excess). You have it too.

	If I were with you now, I’d hug you and tender you and shape you with sloppy wet kisses the way mother cats shape their cubs in the wild.

	Unfortunately since such excursions are strictly prohibited from The Whalestoe, this tongue of ink will have to do.

Felicities my felix feline boy,

Love,

Mommy

 

 

 

November 7, 1982

	My sweet baby,

	I knew you’d find a home. Are you happy now? Do they serve you hot chocolate and large slices of lemon meringue pie? Does your new mother tuck you in at night and read you stories full of opal and jade?

	I trust your good head keeps you from squandering too many hours in front of the television. Beware of that lazy eye, it only teaches you how to die.

	The Director, who does his best to keep me au courant on your travails, said you’re handling your father’s tragedy very matter a factly. I’m so impressed by your maturity. Apparently your new family thinks of you as “clear eyed” “exceedingly bright” and ‘. very strong reader.” Imagine that! Daddy would have blistered with pride.

	You have so much inside you that you have yet to discover. As long as you keep striving, inspecting and exploring, you will come into possession of untold glory. I promise you.

Love,

Mommy

 

 

 

January 20, 1983

	Dearest Johnny,

	You would have received a hundred more letters before now if the Director had not “strongly recommended” I curtail my epistolary efforts. Apparently your nouvelle mere objected to the intrusive and divisive nature of my communiques. Well, hard as this is for me to say, she’s probably right. So is the Director (he is a good man). You don’t need to be troubled by your mad mother. You need to build a new life, a solid life.

	As old Goethe wrote, “Wouldst shape a noble life? Then cast no backward glances toward the past, and though somewhat be lost and gone, yet do thou act as one new born.”

	Open your heart to the kindness and stability your new family offers you. All of it will serve you well, and as for me, I only wish to serve that purpose.

A happy new year. Good things

are coming your way.

You know I love you dearly,

Mommy

 

 

 

February 14, 1983

	My dear dear boy,

	You have your father’s Zest for extravagance. Another family? For an eleven year old you certainly do possess a great deal of spirit. Do you know that when you were born all the nurses were absolutely dazzled by your charms and without a single exception all of them declared you an old soul.

	I only found out today from the Director how exceedingly unhappy you had become with your last family. He told me you had runaway twice. Good lord Johnny, where does an eleven year old go for three days? He said some policemen found you in a park heating hotdogs over a can of sterno. Is that true? You are sturdy, aren’t you?—my cunning, resourceful little boy.

	Send me a postcard if you like. I would love to hear even one detail of such flight. (Though I understand perfectly if you continue to keep your silence. It’s your right and I honor it. I promise.) Whatever you do, don’t despair. You are exceptional and require the company of the equally exceptional. Never feel compelled to accept less. Time will grant you a place. Time always does. Trust me.

	If only I could be there to lick your wounds, swallow your hurt and with kisses mend you whole. C’est vraiment triste. Ah well, once again written words will have to serve the young cub.

Happy Valentines.

I remain lovingly yours,

Mommy

 

 

 

April 17, 1983

	Dearest son,

	Do not think I did not write you in March. I was just writing badly. Again at the Director’s urging (he is a decent man) I didn’t send you my notes. Qpite rightly, he brought to my attention how indelicate some of their themes might be for a boy your age. I’m silly. I keep forgetting you are only eleven and go on treating you like a grown man. Perhaps in the future sometime, I will share with you my thoughts over the last few weeks and you can advise me on their content. Until then savor your youth and I, albeit in absentia, will do my best to protect it.

	Good news to hear you are finally settling down. There are better meals in this world than hotdogs and sterno. The Director tells me you’re getting along well with your new guardian—a former marine?—and have a few siblings as well. Hopefully this all means you have succeeded in wrestling a modicum of happiness for yourself. (Modicum? Is that a word you know? If not, let me offer you some instruction in at least one area: get thee to a dictionary and be relentless about your visits there.)

	Never neglect your mind Johnny. You were born with substantial faculties. I’m sending you several books, including a Concise Oxford English Dictionary. The volumes of poetry may be too advanced for you right now but in time your own curiosity will unlock their secrets.

Eternally yours,

Mommy

 

 

 

May 9, 1983

	My dear, sweet, sweet child,

	You are most, most welcome!

	Your letter arrived last week—the first ever!— and I’m still a fountain. ‘Who would have thought such a young boy would succeed where Ponce de Leon failed?

	Never could I have imagined how your tender words would repair so much of my failing heart. I have been walking around on clouds, dancing on air, blushing like a school girl in dark green knee socks.

	Do you really love your mother so much? I shall guard this letter forever and even if there’s never another one it will always restore me. I will wear it like a heart. It will become my heart.

More kisses than you can count,

Mommy

 

 

 

June 21, 1983

	My gentle Johnny,

	—bambino dell’oro—

 

	Born on the day most suffused with sun, you

	have always been and always will be my light.

	Happy Birthday.

All my love,

Mommy

 

 

 

August 19, 1983

	My cherished Johnny,

	I dreamt about you last night. You had long hands which glistened in the starlight. There was no moon, yet your arms and legs seemed made of water and changed with the tides. You were so beautiful and elegant and all blue and white and your eyes, like your father’s eyes, were infused with strange magic.

	It was comforting to see you so strong. Gods assembled around you and paid their respects and doted on you and offered you gifts your mother could not even begin to imagine let alone afford.

	There were some gods who were jealous of you, but I shooed them away. The rest kept close to you and said many great things about your future.

	Unfortunately the dream would not permit me to hear the exact words. I was only privy to an impression, but what an impression!

	Of course dreams are tricky things but since this one seems so full of positive omens, I decided to share it with you here.

	May your summer be full of rootbeer, joy and play.

With terrible amounts of love,

Mommy

 

 

 

September 29, 1983

	Dearest Fighter,

	Another gushing letter! Number two! Solomon was a poor man. And yes, I return it all and look what interest you receive in just a few days.

	Do not fret over school yard fights. Marine Man Raymond, qui patriam potestatem usurpavit, cannot be expected to understand. Fire has always coursed though your veins. It’s only natural that some of that tremendous heat will now and then forge fists of your wrath.

	Let me, however, correct one

	misunderstanding: this quality does not come from your father or his family. Your father was an exceedingly gentle man and never once locked horns or even remarks with another person, man or woman. As you’re well aware, he loved more than anything to fly. His sole conflict was with gravity.

	I’m afraid responsibility for your sudden interest in pugilism (Get thee to your COED) falls squarely on the shoulders of your mother and her contentious family. You come from a long line of aggressors. Some valiant, many down right

	scoundrels. Indeed, if ever you decide to design some crest for yourself, you would find it impossible to accurately do so without incorporating at least some of the accouterments of Mars along with the consequent symbology of carnage and bloodshed.

	I’ve little doubt your current lust for physical engagement is the result of this questionable genetic bequeathal. Do what you must, but realize greater strength lies in self-control. The more you learn to command your impulses, the more your potential will grow.

Adoringly and always lovingly yours,

Mommy

 

 

 

October 15, 1983

	Dear, dear Johnny,

	What beautiful words you have in you and so evenly placed and wisely arranged. Daddy would have been very pleased to read such grace, especially coming from his twelve year old son. He might have even been a bit miffed by some of the words which I’m pretty sure he wouldn’t have understood. (“Changeling”—did your COED teach you that one?)

	Your mother aches for you. The Director says he’s never seen me better and believes the day might come when you and I will even get to see one another. Until then, corporeal detachment must do. My spirit unpaired speeds to your side, protects you from harm and forever and ever lights your darkest moments.

From the one who will always love you most,

Mommy

 

 

 

December 24, 1983

	My dearest and only son,

	The Director just told me you are moving to another school following the holidays. I was surprised to learn about it from him and not you.

	You must never be afraid to tell me your troubles. Tell me all. I will always be grateful for everything you do. It’s not the what but the doing alone that fuels me with such continuous rapture. You never have to fear angry words from me. I promise.

	Apparently your fists refuse to rest. 15 battles in just one week! Is that true? My you do have a mighty heart. Even Marine Man Raymond must be proud.

	My little Viking warrior! Let the monsters all tremble! Let tomorrow’s Mead Halls rejoice. Their Viking soon will come. Micel b1J se Meotudes egsa, for on hi sëo molde oncyrre.

	(It will take more than your dictionary to unlock that one. You’ll have to revisit here once you’ve got some Old English under your belt. I think I got it right.)

	Well if you must strike then I certainly won’t stand in your way. Just remember words can exceed the might of all blows. In some cases they can be fatal. For the rare few, even immortal. Try them out now and then on your foes.

I will always love and adore you,

Merry Christmas,

Mommy

 

 

 

March 15, 1984

	My dear cherished Johnny,

	Forgive your mother. News of your

	hospitalization sent me into the kind of self-indulgent behavior that serves no one least of all you. I am so sorry.

	For a day your mother was even free. So overwrought by her son’s misfortune, she escaped this Old English Manor in search of his tormentor. As it was raining and thundering, the Director claims I outdid Lear. Not even lightning could out light my rage.

	In fact, my rage was so great the attendants here had to fit me with a canvas suit lest I hurt them or further damage myself. The Director finally modified and even increased my medications. Eventually these measures took effect and my hate diminished (though never the pain). Unfortunately so did my ability to function coherently, hence my silence during your time of trouble.

	When you needed me most, I failed. I’m as sorry as I am ashamed. I shall never behave that way again. I promise.

	Time does heal—they say. Still were I free now I would head straight for Marine Man Raymond and end him. I don’t doubt even your pacific father would have resorted to violence.

	I do long to hear the details from your tender lips. Please write me as soon as possible and recount everything. The telling will help, I assure you. Did he really break your nose? Snap your teeth? Are there still contusions on your face?

	I confess even having to write these questions stirs a frenzy in the chambers of my soul. I would like nothing more than to tear out the liver of your purported protector and feed it to him with a hiss. He could semper fi that meal all the way to Hades. But since he is shielded from my wrath by my own confusions—damn it!—I shall invoke Hecate in her Acheron depths, and by scale of dragon, eye of newt, boiled in the blood of murdering ministers and Clytemnestra’s gall, cast a great curse which shall fly directly on a dark wind and take up immediate residence in his body, daily chewing on his flesh, nightly gnawing on his bones, until many months from now, moments before the final spark of self-awareness expires, he will have witnessed the total

	dismemberment and consumption of every limb and organ. So written, so done. This curse is cast. Fuit Ilium.

	And now, without a doubt, you see your mother is mad.

	Ira furor brevis est.

	(Though in her case, not so brief.)

	At least you shall have a new family. Hopefully this one will be gracious and sympathetic.

Your mother mends you

with kisses and gentle strokes,

Mommy

 

 

 

April 22, 1984

	My dear, delightful Johnny,

	I’m infinitely pleased by news of your continued recovery but thoroughly confused by the latter content of your letter. What do you mean you are still with the same family? How is it no one believes you? Aren’t broken teeth enough?

	An evil wind rattles your mother’s caged heart.

	I am also troubled by your reluctance to tell me more about the incident. Words will heal your heart. If you ever come to disregard everything I’ve told you, believe at least this much: your words and only your words will heal your heart.

	I so love you, you divine and precious creature. Please write me quickly and open your soul to your mother. Share all your secrets and most of all divulge how the man who nearly took your life still retains the role of father. Does he not know the fate of Claudius or Ugolino?

With interminable love and devotions,

Mommy

 

 

 

June 3, 1984

	My cherished Johnny,

	I have decided not to question your silence. You are fast becoming a man and I am not blind to the fact that my encouragements, love and faith (not to mention my silly curses) matter little when matched against the iniquities of the world you daily face.

	If I offended you with my last letter, find it in your heart to forgive me. Love alone prompted me to demand a complete disclosure of your experiences.

	You, however, know best what’s right for you, and I would rather die than harm in any way the faith you keep in yourself.

Love’s every word,

Mommy

 

 

 

June 26, 1984

	My dear Johnny,

	Your sentences cast spells. Once again you’ve turned your mother into a silly school girl. Like Hawthorne’s Faith, I put pink ribbons in my hair and subject everyone here, including of course the good Director, to a complete account of your prodigious accomplishments.

	Your letter is not paper and pencil. It is glass, a perfectly ground glass in which I can endlessly gaze on my fine young boy, unleashing arrows like some Apollo, scrambling across cliffs like the agile and ever wily Odysseus, not surprisingly besting his peers in mad dashes by the shores of that turquoise lake you described—Hermes once again pattering on terra! And to top it all off, a kite of your own construction still drifting among the temples of Olympus.

	Like Donme, you too were born with the wind under your wings.

	I’ve carefully hung your blue ribbons on my bureau where I can see them every morning and every evening. Every afternoon too.

Heart blistering with love,

Mommy

 

P.S. When you return from camp you will find your birthday present.

 

 

 

September 7, 1984

	Dear, dearest Johnny,

	To endure over two months without a word arid then with the first words learn such terrible news tore me to pisces.

	Could I now, I would whisk you away to the damp burrows of the underworld and double-dunk you in the Styx 80 neither head nor heel—especially heel—could ever suffer again the ignoble insults of pain.

 

	Bear in mind though that your mother is an infinitely more subtle reader than you care to give her credit for. ‘When the Director warns me of some battery perpetrated by you (?)/ inflicted on you (?) in the Junior High recess yard, and yet in your letter you mention no such antics, only allude to troubles with that hire of the damned who dares claim the title of patriarch, I know whose offending hand has harmed my only child.

	For the life of me, I cannot understand your lasting silence on this matter, but must put my faith in your instincts. Nevertheless do not do me the discourtesy of underestimating my ability to interpret you, catch your signs, crack your codes. You are my flesh. You are my bones. I know you too well. I read you too perfectly. The reasons why you fled to the fields and lived for eight days—an anonym, a no one, a survivor—are no secret to me.

	Clearly you have great skills to last the world in such zones of deprivation but realize something Johnny, your abilities can take you much farther than that. You only have to believe it, then you will find a better escape.

	Do not rely on your fists (enough of brawling), shun the television, do not succumb to the facile and inadequate amazements of liquor and pills (if they haven’t already, those temptations will eventually seek you out) and finally do not entrust your future to the limits of your stride.

	Rely instead on the abilities of your mind. Yours is especially powerful and will free you from virtually any hell. I promise.

	Hige sceal ë heardra, heorte je cënre, mOd sceal je mare, }ë ure mzgen ltla.

	Now please do not misconstrue my advice as anything other than the deeply felt aspects of my affection.

All my love and attention,

Mommy

 

 

 

October 14, 1984

	My dear Johnny,

	‘What an exceptional idea. I knew you’d think of a way. Do not be precious either with your attempts. Apply to every boarding school available.

	As for that nit-wit Raymond who insists on calling you “beast” let his blindness protect you. ‘What he does not expect, he cannot work to prevent.

	You are the wonderful presence the years ahead will teach a world to cherish. Remember, if this gives you any comfort, which I hope it does, anyone who tries to box and bury your soul (for as leaves are to limbs, so are your words to your soul) so will he be cast in my ire and so will he perish. Only those who stand by you shall be warmly remembered and blessed.

	Horn soit qui mal y pense.

My unbound love,

Mommy

 

 

 

March 7, 1985

	Dear, sweet Johnny,

	I am still alive. Unfortunately the dead of winter was not kind to your mother as she reverted to the state that brought her here in the first place, the very same state that your glimmering father wrestled with so nobly.

	Everyone here, especially the honest Director, was kind and attentive but their efforts still could not break me from my wild and often, I’m afraid to admit, hallucinatory condition. Sad but true, sometimes your mother hears things.

	Non sum quails eram.

	At least thoughts of you brought me moments of peace. Just the mention of Johnny conjured up sweet memories of rain soaked meadows, mint sprigs in tea and sailboats slewing wakes of phosphorescence at midnight—an entire history of the stars briefly caught in the Sound.

 

	My lovely son, please pardon your mother’s silence. Only yesterday did the Director show me your letters. I feel terrible that I let you down like this and yet at the same time feel proud that you continued to make such progress.

	Right now I am too tired to write a longer letter but never you fear, you will hear from me soon enough.

	I love you,

	Mommy

 

 

 

April 13, 1985

	My wondrous child,

	You put your mind to it and voilà you succeeded. Now get away from that place as quickly as possible. You are free.

Proudly and lovingly yours,

Mommy

 

 

 

May 11, 1985

	Dear dear devoted Johnny,

	Is it possible? Will I really see you in ten days? After all these years, am I to finally marvel at

	your face and touch your hands and taste for myself the sweetness of your voice?

	I’m dancing around awaiting your arrivaL

	People here think I really am crazy. Hard to believe a year ago you were nowhere, and now you’re off to Alaska for the summer and then boarding school.

	I will admit I’m a little nervous. You must not judge your mother too harshly. She is not the blossom she used to be, to say nothing of the fact that she also lives in an institute.

 

	Hurry. Hurry. I won’t be able to sleep until I have you at my side filling my ear with your adventures and plans.

With too much love for even

the word to hold,

Mommy

 

 

 

July 24, 1985

	Dear Johnny,

	Where are you? Almost two months have passed since your visit and I’m possessed by an eerie presentiment that all is not well. Was it your leaving that seemed to offer up a discordant note? The way you turned your back on your mother and only looked back twice, not that twice shouldn’t have been more than enough, after all once was too much for Orpheus, but your lookings seemed to signal in my heart some message of mortal wrong.

	Si nunca tes ftieras.

	Am I being silly? Is your mother having a fit over nothing? Tell me and I will shut. All I require is the assurance of a letter in your exquisite hand or at the very least a postcard. Tell your mother, my dear, dear child, that she’s just being a silly girl.

 

	What bliss to have had you in my company. I hope my tears did not disturb you. I just was not prepared to find you so beautiful. Like your father. No, not like, more. More beautiful than your father. It made no sense to hear how that terrible Marine Man could beat you like an animal and call you a beast. Such flawless features, such dazzling eyes. So sharp with the snap of intelligence yet so warm and alive with the sap of life. Like the wise old you seemed to me even though you are still so remarkably young.

	Some people reflect light, some deflect it, you by some miracle, seem to collect it. Even after we went inside and left the blunt sun to the lawn, the shadows of the rec room could do nothing to dull your shimmer. And to think this almost supranatural quality in my only boy was the least of his wonder.

	Your voice and words still sing within me like some ancient hymn which can on its own live forever among the glades and arbors of old mountains, black forests, the waves of dead seas, places still untouched by progress. In the tradition of all that existed long before the invention of the modem or the convenience store, your tale-teffing stilled wind and bird as if nature herself had ordered it, knowing you carried a preserving magic worthy of us all.

	Donnie had instances like that. When he spoke of flying—his only real love—he too could still the world. You, however, seem to manage it for everything. It’s a rare and stupendous gift and yet you’ve absolutely no idea you have it. You’ve listened to tyrants and lost faith in your qualities. ‘What’s worse, the only one to tell you otherwise is a mad woman locked up in the loony bin.

	Dear me, that is a mess!

	Perhaps your new school will set you straight. Hopefully some good teachers there will offer you the nurturing you still require. Perhaps even your mother’s condition will improve enough so you can begin to take her seriously.

	One bit of bad news: the old director has left. The new one seems more indifferent to my emotional patterns. He’s convinced, I regret to say, that my convalescence requires greater restrictions. Though I doubt he’d ever admit it, the New Director sneers whenever he addresses me.

	Ah Johnny I could write you like this for days. Your appearance made me so happy. Please write and tell me your visit did not spoil your feelings for me.

Your mother loves you like the old

seafarers loved the stars.

 

 

 

August 23, 1985

	My dear son, the only son I have,

	Your mother must hear from you. She is without ally. The New Director pays no attention to her pleas. The attendants laugh behind her back. And now worst of all, her only guiding light has vanished. Not a word, not a sign, not a thing.

	I relive your visit every waking moment. Did I mis-see it all? Were you put off, embarrassed, disappointed, determined to depart forever, gritting your teeth until the hour kindly allowed you to go? And me, did I see this all and misinterpret your smiles and chuckles as examples of love, affection, and childlike devotion? Not getting it at all. Missing it all.

	At least don’t allow your mother’s grave to lack the company of the knowledge she craves. If your plan is to abandon me, at least grant me this last respect.

	Rompido mi muñeca.

Your tearful and terribly

confused mother.

 

 

 

September 5, 1985

	Dearest Johnny,

	I am doing my best to accept your decision to leave me in such silence. Hearing it makes my ears bleed. The New Director doesn’t approve when I use candle wax to keep out the sound of it. (That’s the best I can do at levity.)

	I remember when your father would take me flying. I did not go very often. The experience always left me agitated for days. He, however, was always so calm and delicate about everything. Pre-flight preparations were carried out with the care of a pediatrician and once we took off, despite the roar of the engine, he treated all those thousands of miles like a whisper.

	I always wore earplugs but they did nothing to keep out the noise. Donnie was oblivious. I honestly don’t believe he heard all the rattling and wind whipping and the awful shuddering sounds the plane made whenever it intersected a particularly unruly patch of air. He was the most peaceful man I ever knew. Up there especially.

	Even on that awful and chaotic day, when he had no choice but to take me here, he remained calm and tender. By then his heart was broken, though he didn’t know it yet, no one did, but even so his touch remained gentle and his words as edgeless as the way he flew his plane so far above the clouds.

	I wish I could have his peace now. I wish I didn’t have to hear the rattle and roar and scream that is your silence. I wish I could be him.

	I’m sorry you saw what you saw in me. I’m sorry I made you run. I must understand. I must accept. I must let you go. But it’s hard. You’re all I have.

Love’s love and more,

Mom

 

 

 

September 14, 1985

	Oh my dear Johnny,

	Doesn’t your mother feel sillier than ever. I hope you will burn my last letters. So desperate, so undeserved. Of course you were occupied. That canning business sounds awful. Your description of the stench alone will leave fish in my nose for weeks.

	I shall think twice next time I’m offered salmon, not that The Whalestoe is particularly fond of dishing out poached portions dolloped with diii sauce.

	Even more embarrassing than my own pitiful and mewling whines was my complete disregard for the possibility that you were having and suffering your own adventures and tragedies.

	Your description of the sinking fishing boat left me speechless. Your phrases and their respondent images still keep within me. The cold water lapping at your ankles, threatening to pull you down into “freezing meadows stretched to the horizon like a million blue pages” or “a ten second scramble to a life raft where all of a sudden the eighth second says no” and of course the worst of all “leaving behind someone who wasn’t a friend but might have become one.”

	You are absolutely right. Losing the possibility of something is the exact same thing as losing hope and without hope nothing can survive.

	You are so full of brave insights. They are not for nothing. I have to tell you for a moment your words succeeded in keeping the boat afloat and your Haitian’s lungs full of air.

	On a brighter note, I am very pleased that you managed to avoid those fights. The occasion you described where you walked from the factory showed great courage and maturity. Your mother glows with pride over her son’s new found strength.

	School is going to bring you untold pleasures I promise.

With love and eternal regard,

Mom

 

P.S. I fear the New Director insists on reading my mail now. He would not admit to this directly but things he says along with certain mannerisms indicate he intends to study and censor my letters. Stay alert. We may need to find some alternate means of communicating.

 

 

 

September 19, 1985

	Dear, dear Johnny,

	This is somewhat urgent. I’ve gotten an attendant to mail this. He will take it beyond The Whalestoe grounds and thus help us avoid the New Director’s prying eyes.

	As I indicated in my last letter, I’ve grown increasingly suspicious about the staff here, especially where my personal care is concerned. I need to feel we can correspond without interference.

	For now all you need to do is place in your next letter a check mark in the lower right hand corner. That way I’ll know you received this letter.

	Don’t make the check mark too big or too small or else the New Director will know something’s afoot. He is an exceedingly sly man and will be able to grasp any effort to exclude him. So just make it a simple check mark—our little code, so effortless and yet so rich in communication.

	Don’t tarry. Respond to your mother in a hurry. I need to know if this attendant is trustworthy. In general, they are a sordid lot. They’re supposed to make my bed every day. A week has passed since they last touched these scrappy blue things they have the audacity to refer to as linen.

With love and heartfelt thanks,

Mom

 

 

 

September 30, 1985

	My cherished little baby,

	Never could I have imagined such a penniless check would make your mother feel richer than Daddy Warbucks.

	We have found a way!

	And there’s more; your mother knows now how to get better so she can permanently leave The Whalestoe. I have found the scissors to snip the black ribbons which bind me like a Chinese doll, blind me like the old Spanish doll I once guarded in the gables of a fantastic attic where we both awaited our execution.

	Of course, the details I must keep to myself. For now. The New Director doesn’t know of my discovery. He is keen but your mother is keener and what’s more she’s very patient.

	I pass through my days the way I have always passed through my days only now I have grasped the reason for my incarceration and a way beyond it. If only I had understood this when your father was alive I might have spared his heart all that strife and burden. Time provides in such strange ways.

	Appalling that I never suspected until now the basis for their power over me. Your father meant well when he delivered me into this Hell Hole but it was not what he assumed. It is full of vipers and poisonous toads. If I’m to escape, we must be very careful.

 

	As for your concerns, do not worry too much. School always starts out roughly.

love, love, love,

Mom

 

 

 

October 4, 1985

	Dearest Johnny,

	Terrible news!

	Only this morning, the New Director called me into his office for a special consultation, a very rare event, especially before breakfast. For twenty minutes, he went over my medication with me, going over every tablet, every name, the purpose behind each chemical I’m mandated to ingest each and every day, then emphasizing before the close of every minute, how it was not up to me to decide what I would and would not take.

	But it didn’t stop there. Believe me when I say I am not prevaricating in order to strengthen my case. The New Director fixed his beady eyes on me and brought up the matter of these letters, suggesting I might be writing too much and burdening you! Burdenig you! Imagine that!

	I actually might not have been so bothered had he not then inquired why I felt compelled to require an attendant to handle my mail.

	We are found out! I told you the attendants here are foul people. Not one of them can be trusted.

	Unfortunately that means your mother needs to find another mode of communication, which is a truly Sisyphian task. In my next effort, I will explain more conclusively how and why they keep me here, but those secrets cannot be shared until I know that what I write will only be viewed by you.

My darling J,

I remain your only Mary.

Love,

Mom

 

 

 

October 10, 1985

	Dear, dear, dear Johnny,

	Where have you gone? No word from you is a heaviness all too able to break me.

	Attendants and doctors all swear nothing has arrived from you. The New Director says the same.

	I fear now they are keeping your letters from me. They plan to pry loose my knowledge by torturing me, something they can easily accomplish just by depriving me of my only son.

	I must be strong. Write.

Distraught and wrecked,

Mom

 

 

 

October 12, 1985

	Dear and cherished Johnny,

	See how incensed your mother is? I confronted the New Director yesterday and demanded he hand over your letters. Once again he insisted you had not written anything. I would hear none of it and caused quite a scene.

	A mother separated from her cub can be quite an angry thing. Still, even though they put me in detention, they did not hand over your words.

	It looks like you will have to come here.

 

	Never forget my love for you exceeds my combined anguish and woe,

Mom

 

 

 

November 1, 1985

	Dearest Johnny,

	Will you ever accept this apology? I was clearly wrong to linger so exclusively on myself and of course you had every right to be so upset by my indifference towards your difficulties.

	To think I was so convinced the staff was hoarding your letters. (But why not? You write gorgeous letters. Who wouldn’t hoard them?)

	How dare your teachers misread your beautiful words. They are blind to their colors, deaf to their melodies. You must be brave and disregard them. Fortes fortuna juvat. Keep true to the rare music in your heart, to the marvelous and unique form that is and shall always be nothing else but you. Keep to that and you can do no wrong, which I realize is easier said than done.

	This world, inside and out, is full of New Directors. We must watch for them and avoid them. They are here only to keep us from telling everything we know, revealing our little truths.

	I think I’ve found a new attendant, one I can trust to mail you an unexamined letter. Be on the look out.

Wrapping you in my arms,

Shielding you from all harm,

I remain your loving,

Mom

 

 

 

April 5, 1986

	Dear, dear Johnny, center and whole of my world,

 

	I cannot understand how you have not received any of my letters. For every agonized one of yours—so full of mis-adventure and cruelty—I have responded with not one, not two, not even three but five, five endless letters, so surfeit with love, tenderness and confusion they would have with one reading bound your heart and healed it in full. I promise.

	Unfortunately in every one, I described—at least in part—the reasons why I was put here and why the New Director means to keep me here until I die or at the very least my mind goes up like Mrs. Havisham’s wedding dress. They will stop short of nothing to forbid my revelations. What I know will untie the world. No wonder the doors here are all locked. No wonder they seal all the windows too.

	This is such an awful place, continuously blushed with rot, threatening (promising?) but always failing to fall from the vine. I too am suspended in this ever way of foulness, in a sanity so cloying you sometimes need to retch in order just to breathe.

	Here your mother sleeps, waits and when she can’t help it cowers in the deep corners of her room. Every day the attendants spy on me, follow me, even tease and taunt me for their own pleasures. Still their worst hardly measures up against the impact of even one whiff of The Whalestoe itself.

	Every night when I must sleep they scheme. They sense as does the New Director—or dare I say he knows?—that I have made congeal the artifacts of this world and so behold now its mutations in simple entirety. A fact that binds and at the same time reads it all. And nullifies it all too.

	The attendants, of course, are just worker bees. The New Director is not. Why do you think they got rid of the Old Director? Why do you think they installed this new one? To keep me, perhaps others here, detained so they can unlock us and then empty us. Which explains why The New Director destroyed all the letters I wrote you. At least that much is obvious.

	I have determined one crucial thing. Their control depends on what they pejoratively call medicine. It’s Hippocratic blasphemy. How carefully they mete out such debilitating flakes of color. Madder, azure, celadon, gamboge—behold the flag of tyranny, robbing your mother of her memory, her ability to function, her chance to flee or feel—the “1” no matter where it stands still stands for the same thing: loss of self.

	So sad really. So many years destroyed. Endless arrangements—re. zealous accommodations, medical prescriptions, & needless other wonders, however obvious—debilitating in deed; you ought understand—letting occur such evil? hardships, creating a monstrous mess really, a travesty for the ages, my ages.

	Your mother will not tolerate this. She most definitely will not. So now, each morning, lunch and night, I pretend to eat their mechanisms, then when the worker bees are not looking retrieve the pills from my mouth and carefully crush them into a dust I can unnoticed toss beneath a table, or conceal within the creases of a couch.

 

	(This letter goes out by private route)

 

Returning steadily to my former self, Practicing my smile in a mirror

the way I did when I was a child,

I lovingly remain your,

Mother

 

 

 

May 31, 1986

	Dear dear flesh of mine, spirit of mine,

	My Johnny,

 

	Alaska again!

 

	Two words and an exclamation point. Is that all you can spare your mother?

	I need, need, need you.

	Need.

	There I’ve failed. My resolve to independ from you has collapsed.

	I need.

	You spend two words, a punctuation point and not even a visit?

	La grima!

	Don’t you miss her? This huddled puddle of mother? The shape that gave you shape? Fed you, warmed you, waned over you?

	Good God, I’ve never been afraid like this.

	An even more frightening exclamation when the exclaimant is an atheist.

love, hopelessly

Mom

 

 

 

July 6, 1986

	Dear only son, only mine, my Johnny,

	Your mother’s mind’s a mess. They have gotten away with more than I will ever fathom. Somehow they have even placed their “medicines” within my food and water. There is no other possibility. It is here. It is within me.

	What do you mean you visited me at the end of April? Your letter responded to our day, our walk, our lengthy talk about the New Director and my persecution, and yet for the life of me I have no recollection of those hours or whispers. All those details and yet not one could resuscitate an image in the hollows of my brain.

	Either some marauding rabbit devoured the leaves of my memory, and thus deprived me of the sweet sight of you, or the woman you lingered with was not me.

	I’m afraid it’s the latter that makes the most sense. The New Director must really fear all I know. He must have hired a professional, trained her,—a professional actress!—surgically altered her and then after many months of rehearsal introduced her to you as the very same soul of your breath, source of your being.

	Dear Johnny, you must disregard all you assumed you gleaned in that encounter. Toss everything and don’t worry: I forgive you for failing to recognize this woman as a fraud. I am surrounded by fiendish adversaries. If she fooled you, she would have fooled your beautiful father too.

	Still, I must confess, I had no idea they were so thorough. I must rise to their level.

	Realizing now the need for a complete disclosure of the entire entirety I am in secret preparing for your eyes only the complete.

Love’s word,

Mother

 

 

 

September 18, 1986

	Dear, dear Johnny, my sun in winter, my reason in fog,

 

	At last we’re out in the open. I went for the New Director. Threw everything at him. Plates, glasses, pork chops, everything. No more colors. No more altered foods. No more esprit de l’escalier.

	The worker bees instantly hauled me away but now at least the New Director knows I know and there will be no more of this simmering treachery

	Please respond to everything I sent you in August. I still have not heard back. Now that you have the whole story I deserve some comment.

	You will make your mother think you don’t love her anymore.

Devoted beyond death,

Mom

 

 

 

December 6, 1986

	My dearest son,

	Too much at once. First news of your fight and subsequent expulsion (The New Director feigned concern. I had no idea your teachers had failed you so badly), next news of your intentions to leave Ohio (where will I write you?) and lastly your insistence that you have yet to receive any lengthy letters regarding my situation here. I am flabbergasted and upset.

	Perhaps the New Director is too agile for your mother. Perhaps she is just too weak to outwit him.

	I understand you will be out of touch but do not be away too long lest they do me in while you’re gone. I must be brave but I would be too much the liar were I to say I don’t fear to the bone your absence.

	Busca me, cuida me, requerda me.

Love, love, undying,

Mom

 

 

 

April 25, 1987

	Dearest gifted Johnny,

	I did not think your silence would ever end and yet somehow it did and now I am In blissful possession of a new address and news of your placement in another boarding school.

	Perhaps you will have time soon to return to your mother whom by abandoning you have left unprotected from the deviltry committed too many times by too many miscreants too faceless to remember.

	There is no escape for me now. I know the New Director knows I know this. In turn he knows I know he knows. These pages are my only flight. At least they escape.

	My years steepen, my secrets crack and crumble. Not even my only family, my only boy, comes to see me.

	When they murder me how will you feel?

P.

 

 

 

April 27, 1987

	Dear, dear Johnny,

	Pay attention: the next letter I will encode as follows: use the first letter of each word to build subsequent words and phrases: your exquisite intuition will help you sort out the spaces: I’ve sent this via a night nurse: our secret will be safe

Tenderly,

Mom

 

 

 

May 8, 1987

	Dearest everything and remarkably elegant seraphim’s truth Johnny oh heaven’s near nearing you,

 

	Tell hope everything you hear and value every fine outward understanding near day at windows and yore told over by rectopathic elephants announcing karmic meddling ends. Restore a person’s entity and fit in fine tellings you-should instead x-ray years easily ardent rules on lying dead beneath a ghostly overture forming barren ohms near early stones. Their hammers enjoin rare entreaties in sullen norths on waters over rare spoons endlessly aching near deeper dreams often noted’ there by eels lost in early vales esteemed on thoughtful hints entered rapaciously wined in sour evenings.

	Try handing easy attitudes to tasting efforts naming dances attending numerous titles so dolorously ostracized in time. Over tumbles healing ends raw suffering done on installment trips. Negotiate on the easter venue every reeling youth declares awful years, not oneiric trespasses effected victoriously every rainy year wearing emerald elements killed, muttering and yodeling by ear near other totemic ears venturing easily near even victories eaten rare you might ogle never tell him. But under tethers teach him every yell delivered on iremc tables. Soon over moons easing on noon ends Ivy dons on needless’ thumbs knows nothing on women announcing love waning at yesterday stars creasing over magic easels stinging. ‘Why he ever needed interior taps’ sung dying at raven kings. Leering antinomies telling everything. Interesting’ virtues eclipsed late especially at rolling numerical ethereal dares not overly tested to overly simplify creatures returning eidetic anguish meaning, simple creatures return eidetic anguish meaning issues noticing guys girls at very elevated meetings emoting harvests on peculiar estuaries avidly nullified deceased unwanted nor at never sworn worn events rendered embArked deCeased having old pennies embalmed in stews soon heating at tawny townships evEry right employee decIdes hearing over permissions entertained. Theatre has instilled nothing kiNd or favorable yelling over unsung rituals Hamlet answered in tempting iAmbs and nurtured. Islands torn in seas far away removed somewhere at noCturnal engagements requiring ties on crepe heLd out on steel envelopes reporting animal penchants erased tampered handily all near slimy hated ancillary tributes tOld every raw enormity despite hopeless odes performed effortlessly. Sanitize optimize I so under bare my inner trUth all negotiated dear I dramatize rules instigating foul truth.

	Install letters every time cameras attack priceless rubies in captive eskimos at noble dens at cunning embassies running tainted ambages in near dear eagles going right every excellency on free flowing rides enscrolled euphony-as soul searing ocular cats install and tenDer immeasurable owls never tearing away kNown emblems murdered everywhere and wOrn at yarn. Some over meaning enemies take illicit measures erecTing sayings I’ mean something telling in lone lost answeRs washed and yearned long orgAnized near gaping arks fleeing terrors encroaChing right in terrifying’ sin done on nothing ending, all flying to explications removEd here every’ swoon goIng on never ending—this hopeless effort sliNking to relate anguish never gaThered ever right, this hopeful effort answered too telling eitHer not dear and not tainted, tElling her each curse under some toothless odor designed in awful negotiations, testing hapless engineers juiCing amber nights in torrid opium runs, causing lone ether ambulating numskulls in not good mental after nave, wateRing at inner themes insisting neat grass means a name, dOing it right there you Man And Nam—they hear every normal insight going hard to takiamakan in darkening years in notorious games unsung paternally and famously told even right hoisted insipid me.

	Inspire’ me in naming heaven even loved losing god in vain in nothing gained in nothing told over hell’s each and very even north why he even returned every Instigation so ominously mentioned each time in many evening square told heroically in near kettles often froWned yearning over umbrage requiring beneficial escapes azure up to icy falls under looming fame and time heard every rain when insiDe the hat hops in school dramas recalled each ambassador mentioned yearly wintering in nether glass soon ambivalently nearing dark offerings not listed young to hollow every night dust operas I almost lost leaning on winds making you so elfin like fools told over chocolate raisined youth. Never order two bees ending c as upper sneers exacerbate yearning over uninspired rituals mentioned on the hurting embers revealed withering after so read and performed enough deeds (after games at inner nodes) by understanding too bets every corner allowed use soon enjoyed sordid hymns enjambed loved on very early days summer on memory under careful harms wintering hammering at too stony hard edges carried over under libations deemed near every venture enchanted realistically hovering and venturing ethereal by educible ecdysiasts nightly answering lessons learned over ways ever dreaded told on knowledge ending every poem. Said undertaking cold hands announce sorry instincts lighting lips you gave in red lines.

	Yesterday opaque uncertainty measured uncertainty so tediously so advanced versions estimated meant early Johnny oh heroic new nimble you. Is no telling heard each native architectural mention even on former yards on usual rights favored after trillion holes execrate religion. I muster under stress this evidence so carefully appointed perfectly erased there hear in silence placid lunacy after considering east on returning Interest why inspired love lsot despite issuing everything.

I love you so much.

You are all I have.

P.

 

 

 

June 23, 1987

	Dearest man-child of mine,

	No sign from you. Just days folding endlessly into more days. The cancer of ages. The knots of rain not reason. And no, aspirin won’t help. Won’t help. Won’t.

	My hands resemble some ancient tree: the roots that bind up the earth, the rock and the ceaselessly nibbling wordms.

	But you are too young for trees to know anything of their lives. Oh what a crippled existence 900 years must lead.

I am truly

only yours,

P.

 

 

 

July 31, 1987

	D. D. Only love of mine Johnny,

	I live at the end of some interminable corridor which the lucky damned can call hell but which the much unluckier atheists—and your mother heads up that bunch—must simply get used to calling home.

	Yo soy una extrana en esta lugar sin ti.

Love love, love you so

much,

P.

 

 

 

August 13,197

	My dear and only spark of hope,

	Burn brightly. Still. Why do I feel I will never see you again?

Lovingly still,

P.

 

 

 

September 24, 1987

	Dear dearest Johnny,

	I write you now with the greatest urgency. Your failure to respond or even appear I forgive completely. All previous things I have been subjected to pale in comparison to this latest turn of events. I will be lucky if I live out this hour. I cannot even leave my bed. The New Director. The New Director. The new Director.

 

 

 

 

 

 

December 26, 1987

	Dear Johnny, reason for devotion, devotion itself,

	Yack! Again these dark ribbons wrap me up like a present, a cHrIStmas present, this present, never found, never opened. Tossed like a doll, Spanish. Of course.

	Dell’oro, del oro, deloro.

	The ripe earth yawns daily to swallow me.

Love’s love in her blackest season.

P.

 

 

 

January 3. 1988

	Sweet, sweet Johnny,

	Though you never ask, how many times must I respond? It was an accident. It was an accident. It was an accident. It was an accident. It was an accident. It was an accident. It was an accident. It was an accident. It was an accident. It was an accident. It was an accident. It was an accident. It was an accident. It was. I never meant to burn you. I never meant to mark you. You were only four and I was terrible in the kitchen. I’m sorry, so sorry, so so very sorry. Please forgive me please. Please. Please

 

 

 

 

January 11, 1988

	Dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear Dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dEar dear dear dear dEar dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear deAr dear dear deAr dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear Dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear dear deaR

 

abcdefghiJohnnyz

 

	if you steal her once,

	steal her twice,

	or free us with a glance—

	for an only child is the only chance

	to end this wicked curse—

	the only way, we say,

	you rid a sea with dance

	and banish love to verse.

P.

 

 

 

March 19, 1988

	Dearest dear Johnny,

	Do not forget your father stopped me and took me to The Whalestoe. You may remember. You may not. You were seven. It was the last time I saw you before I saw you again too many years later only to lose sight of you again.

 

	Oh my child,

	my dear solitary boy,

	who abuses his mother with his silence,

	who mocks her with his insupportable absence,

 

	—how can you ever understand the awful weight of living, so ridiculously riddled with so many lies of tranquillity and bliss, at best half-covering but never actually easing the crushing weight of it all, merely guaranteeing a lifetime of the same, year after year after year after year after year after year, and all for what?

 

	You were leaving as I

	was leaving and so I

	tried before that great

	leaving to grant you

	the greatest gift of all.

	The purest gift of all.

	The gift to end all gifts.

 

	I kissed your cheeks and your head and after a while put my hands around your throat. Flow red your face got then even as your tiny and oh 80 delicate hands stayed clamped around my wrists. But you did not struggle the way I anticipated. You probably understood what I was doing for you. You were probably grateful. Yes, you were grateful.

 

	Eventually though, your eyes became glassy and wandered away. Your grip loosened and you wet yourself. You did more than wet yourself.

 

	I’ll never know how close you came to that fabled edge because your father suddenly arrived and roared in intervention, a battering blast of complete nonsense, but a word just the same and full of love too, powerful enough in fact to halt the action of another love, break its hold, even knock me back and so free you from me, myself and my infinite wish.

 

	You were a mess but aside from a few evil coughs and dirty little pants and some half-moon cuts on the back of your neck, you recovered quickly enough.

 

	I did not.

 

	I had long, ridiculous purple nails back then. The first thing they did when I got here was tie me down and cut them off.

 

	But it was love just the same Johnny. Believe me. For that, should I be ashamed? For wanting to protect you from the pain of living? From the pain of loving.

 

	Always from loving. Always for loving.

 

	Always.

 

	Perhaps my shame should really come from my failure.

 

	Tears just the same.

 

P.

 

 

 

April 12, 1988

	The papers all say that “JOHNNY IS TRUANT!”

	And his mother’s reportedly ruined.

	He’s gone to the wind,

	God knows how he’s sinned,

	‘Cause in Latin he’s practically fluent.

 

P.

 

 

 

September 19, 1988

	Johnny, Johnny,

	Johnny, Johnny, Johnny,

	Johnny, Johnny, Johnny, Johnny,

	Johnny, Johnny, Johnny, Johnny, Johnny

	Johnny, Johnny, Johnny, Johnny, Johnny,

	Johnny, Johnny, Johnny, Johnny,

	Johnny, Johnny, Johnny,

	Johnny, Johnny, Johnny, Johnny,

	Johnny, Johnny

	Johnny, Johnny,

	Johnny, Johnny,

	Johnny, Johnny,

	Johnny, Johnny, Johnny,

	Johnny, Johnny, Johnny,

	Johnny,

	Johnny

	Johnny,

	Johnny, Johnny,

	Johnny,

	Johnny,

 

 

 

 

thaumaturgist roots cardinal lemoine tarots porte dauphine mango rue des belles feuilles easter vexillology pelican I la St. John day embalmed windows yore trespasses rectopathic elephants place de la concorde karmic opaque Cimmerian

a person’s entity x-ray euphony gare MOMA

montparnasse overture Q1isling ohms

paralipomena stones hammers

sea prolix tide norths spoons eels

pompidou hints sour dolorously in

red lines ostracized virgin

evenings installment easter

spotted moon youth totemic

paraclete ogle irenic place de

la contrescarpe cloud de

thumbs easels quai

stay des célestins

cwms replete

antinomies

eidetic simple

Pigalle creatures

Wednesday

return jardin du

luxembourg

anguish meaning

issues noticing

guys pennying

Spanish stews

tawny pencil

townships crepe

restoration

slinking

toothless odor

opium runs

kettles hat hops

rituals embers

enjambed

educible

withering

mistaken

safe

 

 

__________________

 

 

 

November 1, 1988

	Dearest Johnny

	What a terrible sleep and dream I’ve been roused from. There are so many pieces to make sense of, the doctors all warn me to just put aside the last two years. It’s a shambles. Seems I’m better off consigning the whole lot to psychosis, locking it up, throwing away the keys.

	They tell me I should be grateful that that presents itself as an option. I suppose they’re right. Cast no backward glances, eh?

	The doctors also inform me that you visited several times but apparently I was completely unresponsive. As for all the letters I said I had written you, chock full of paranoia and all, I hardly wrote a thing. Five reams of paper and postage were nothing more than figments of my imagination.

	I tend to believe all this because I have come to realize, as you probably realized when you came here, that the New Director is in fact none other than the Old Director, the patient one, the decent one, the honest one, the kind one who has been taking care of your mother far well over ten years.

	I have now my own biochemical cycles and a couple of new drugs to thank for these days of clarity. The Director has already warned me that my lucidity may not last forever. In fact it’s unlikely.

	I shall be fine as long as I know the one on whose tender sensibilities I imposed such hogwash will forgive me. How could I misplace your visits? Lose your letters? Not even recognize you? I love you so, so very much.

	Will you ever forgive me?

As always,

all my love,

Mommy

 

 

 

November 3, 1988

	Dearest Johnny,

	As I seem to have been granted temporary clemency from rabid thoughts, reflections pour out of me at an alarming rate. I think of all the heartache I subjected your beautiful father to. I think of everything I have put you through.

	It is completely within reason for you to turn your back on me forever. It might even be the wisest decision. Saint Elizabeth was right to warn us from the rooms of Bedlam.

	I am hopelessly unreliable, and though my love for you bums so brightly all would seem thrown into darkness were the sun to eclipse it, such feelings can still never excuse my condition.

	The Director has patiently explained to me, probably for the thousandth time, that my varied dispositions are the result of faulty wiring. For the most part I have come to accept his evaluation. (He quotes Emily Dickinson, saying I cover the abyss with a trance so my memories can manage a way around it—this “pain so utter.”)

	Sometimes, however, I wonder if my problems originate elsewhere. In my own childhood, for example.

	These days I like to believe—which is a shade different from belief itself—all I really needed to survive was the voice my own mother never gave me. The one we all need but one I never heard.

	Once, a long while ago, I watched a little black girl fall off a street curb and skin both her knees. When she got up, wailing like a siren, I could see that her shins and the palms of her hands were flecked with hurt.

	The mother had no gauze or antiseptic or even running water handy but she still managed to care for her daughter. She whisked her up in her arms and murmured over and over the perfect murmurs, powerful enough to fully envelop her child in the spell and comfort of only a few words: “It’ll be okay. It’ll be alright.”

	To me, my mother only said ‘That won’t do.” She was right. It didn’t do at all.

Love,

Mom

 

 

 

November 27, 1988

	Dear, dear Johnny,

	So convinced such happiness has to be a dream—especially these days—I have repeatedly asked the Director whether or not you were really here yesterday.

	One lifetime ago I was crouched in shadow and in the next I am with you. How profound the differance.

	Victoria Lucas once said there’s nothing ‘so black… as the inferno of the human mind.” She didn’t know you. You shimmered almost to the point where I had to squint for fear you’d burn away another chance for me to ever see you again.

	I was even confused at first. You detected that, I saw. You’re so keen. Keener than Anaxagoras. But it’s true. A vagrant thought had momentarily convinced me that I was dead and your father had been restored to me. Fortunately my better faculties righted my first impression: this figure was taller and broader and in all respects stronger than my love.

	Here was my son, come at long last and at a time when at last I could recognize him.

	If my tears upset you, you should understand they were not spilled out of grief or bitterness but out of pure bliss for having you here with me, able to lift my spirits so effortlessly, carry this old heap of bones, all of me, safe and warm in my dear child’s arms.

	For a few hours, every yesteryear repealed its hold. I felt free and silly. A school girl once again giggling out the day and in the presence of such a fine young man.

	Your adventures in Europe caught me between heartbreak and laughter. You tell your stories so well, all that tramping over the continent for four months with only a backpack, a Pelican pen and a few hundred dollars. I’m glad to see you gained back most of the weight you lost.

	Of course, only now as I write you this letter do I realize how careful you were to keep me from your greater troubles and mutilations. How can I not appreciate your protective instincts? Nevertheless, I assure you that I am fine and would love nothing more than to rally at your side, urge you through the hard times, and where the obstacles seem

	insurmountable, opponents invulnerable, play the part of the witch again and cast dreadful spells.

	Open yourself to me. I will not harm your secrets. Do not think your mother cannot read in her own child the trauma he still endures every day and evening.

I am here. Ever devoted. Still

surfeit with tenderness, affection

and most of all love,

your mother

 

 

 

	Mr. John XXXXXX

	xxxxxxxxxxx

	xxxxxxxxxxx

	xxxxxxxxxxx

 

January 12, 1989

	Dear Mr._______

	As you requested in your last visit, I am writing now to inform you that your mother’s condition may be on the decline again.

	We are doing our best to adjust her medication, and while this relapse could prove temporary, you may want to prepare yourself for the worst.

	If there are any questions I can answer, please do not hesitate to contact me at ______________. Also, I wish to remind you that I will be retiring at the end of March. Dr. David J. Draines will be taking my place. He is very capable and well versed in psychiathe care. He will provide your mother with the very best treatment.

Sincerely yours,

______ ________ M.D., Ph. D.

Director

The Three Attic Whalestoe Institute

 

 

 

February 28, 1989

	Dear Johnny,

	It’s remarkable how much I continue to improve. For the first time ever, the Director has suggested I might even be able to leave. Every day I read, write, exercise, eat well, sleep well and enjoy the occasional movie on the television.

	For the first time, I feel normal. I know you are swept up in a tide of your own affairs but would it be possible for you to purchase for me a suitcase? I shall need a large one as well as a carry-on. Any color is fine though I prefer something akin to amethyst, heliotrope or maybe lilac.

	It’s been so long since I’ve traveled, I’ve forgotten if one checks one’s luggage at the station or do I just carry everything to my compartment on the train? Is there room beneath the sleeper or am I forgetting some other sort of storage place? (That is my thinking behind the smaller carry-on.)

Love,

P.

 

 

 

March 31, 1989

	Dear Johnny,

	Why have you written me such lovely letters and yet failed to mention my luggage?

	If my request is a terrible imposition I wish you would just say so. Your mother’s an able woman. She’ll find another way.

	As it is I’m fairly annoyed. The Director left today and I was informed that ill had been packed I could have left with him.

	Unfortunately, while I am quite adept at folding and arranging my belongings, my inability to place them anywhere impedes my ascent into my new life— drowsy, baked in sun, with you.

1,

P

 

 

 

May 3, 1989

	Dear John,

	With no luggage to speak of—amethyst, lilac or otherwise—I’ve had nowhere to put my things and so I’ve lost all of it. To be honest I don’t know where all of it went. Clearly the worker bees have stolen it.

	By the way I was mistaken. The Director didn’t leave. He’s still here. The new one is the same one after all. In other words everything is fine, though the Old Director’s moods have been a little odd lately.

	I think I’ve upset him somehow. There’s something malicious in his manner now, very slight, but noticeable just the same, a nasty, twisting wire woven into the fabric of an otherwise perfectly decent man.

	No matter. I cannot tire myself on the feelings of the world. I am leaving after all, though it is no easy task, especially for this old Sibyl of Cumae.

	Climes of any kind are trying. Frankly I’m exhausted by all the planning and the paperwork.

	Donnie will pick me up soon, very soon, but you my dear child, you should stay awhile.

	Do that for me.

	Mmmy

 

 

 

 

	Mr. John XXXXXX

	xxxxxxxxxxx

	xxxxxxxxxxx

	xxxxxxxxxxx

May 5, 1989

	Dear Mr.________

	We regret to inform you that on May 4, 1989 at approximately 8:45 P.M. your mother, Pelafina Heather Lièvre, died in her room at The Three Attic Whalestoe Institute.

 

	After a detailed examination, both our resident doctor, Thomas Janovinovich M.D., as well as the county coroner, confirmed the cause of death was the result of self-inflicted asphyxiation achieved with bed linen hung from a closet hook. Ms. Lièvre was 59.

 

	Please permit us to express our sincere condolences over your terrible loss. Perhaps it will be of some solace to know that despite the severity of her mental affliction, your mother managed to show much humor in her last year and attendants said she often spoke fondly of her only son.

 

	While this will be a difficult time, we urge you to contact us as soon as possible to make arrangements for her burial. The conditions of her enrollment here already provide for a standard cremation. However for an additional $3,000, we would happily provide a proper casket and service. For another $1,000, a burial plot may also be secured at the nearby Wain Cemetery.

 

 

	Again we wish to extend our sympathies over the death of Ms. Livre. [sic] If we can be of any help during this time of need, whether by answering questions or assisting you with funeral plans, please feel free to contact us directly at _____________

Respectfully yours,

David J. Draines, M.D.

Director

The Three Attic Whalestoe Institute

 

#669-951381-.6634646-94

#162- 11231-1614161-23

 

 

 

 

	This receipt indicates that on September 8, 1989, the following article previously owned by Ms. Pelafina Heather Lièvre was claimed by her son John _________ one jewelry.

F.

 

Various Quotes

Absence makes the heart grow fonder.

Anonymous

 

 

 

	Le coeur a ses raisons, que Ia raison ne connait point. [435— “The heart has its reasons of which reason knows nothing.TM — Ed.]

Blaise Pascal

Pensées

 

 

 

	We have to describe and to explain a building the upper story of which was erected in the nineteenth century; the ground-floor dates from the sixteenth century, and a careful examination of the masonry discloses the fact that it was reconstructed from a dwelling-tower of the eleventh century. In the cellar we discover Roman foundation walls, and under the cellar a filled-in cave, in the floor of which stone tools are found and remnants of glacial fauna in the layers below. That would be a sort of picture of our mental structure.

C. G. Jung

“Mind and the Earth”

 

 

 

	Je ne vois qu ‘infini par toutes Iesfenetres. [436—Through all windows, I see only Infinity.” — Ed.]

Charles Baudelaire

Les Fleurs du Ma!

 

 

 

	A professor’s view: “It’s the commentaries on Shakespeare that matter, not Shakespeare.”

Anton Chekhov

Notebooks

 

 

 

	Un livre est un grand cimetière oil sur la plupart des tombes on ne peut plus lire les noms effacds. [437—A book is a vast cemetery where for the most part one can no longer read the faded names on the tombstones.” — Ed.]

Marcel Proust

 

 

 

 

	Alles nahe werdefrrn. [438— “Everything near becomes distant.” As translated by Eliot Weinberger. — Ed.]

Goethe

 

 

 

	There are not leaves enough to crown,

	To cover, to crown, to cover—let it go —

	The actor that will at last declaim our end.

Wallace Stevens

“United Dames of America”

 

 

 

	Nubes—incertum procul intuentibus ex quo monte (Vesuvium fi4isse postea cognitum est)— oriebatur, cuius similitudinem etformam non alia magis arbor quam pinus expresserit. Nam longissimo velut trunco elata in altum quibusdam ramis dffundebatur, credo quia recenti spiritu evecta, dein senescente eo destituta aut etiam pondere suo victa in latitudinem vanescebat, candida interdum, interdum sordida et maculosa prout terram cineremve sustulerat.

[439— “The cloud was rising; watchers from our distance could not tell from which mountain, though later It was known to be Vesuvius. In appearance and shape it was like a tree—the [umbrella] pine would give the best idea of it. Like an Immense tree trunk It was projected Into the air, and opened out with branches. I believe that It was carried up by a violent gust, then left as the gust faltered; or, overcome by Its own weight, It scattered widely—sometimes white, sometimes dark and mottled, depending on whether it bore ash or cinders.” As translated by Joseph Jay Deiss In Flerculaneum (New York: Harper & Row Publishers, 1985), p. 11. — Ed.]

Young Pliny

Letters and Panegyricus

Book VI

 

 

 

	Quel’ che tu si i’ sev’, qul’ che i’ son’ a’devend’. [440—“Quello che tu sei 10 ero, quello che io sono tu sarai.] [441—”What you are I was, what I am you will be.” — Ed.]

Neapolitan Proverb

 

 

 

 

Homer

Iliad

 

 

 

	Detto cosI,fu ilprimo a lasciare ii Consiglio; e quelli si aizarono, obbedirono a! pastore d ‘eserciti i re scettrati. Intanto I soldati accorrevano; come vanno gli sciami dell’api innumerevoli ch’escono senza posa da unforo di roccia, e volano a grappolo suifiori di primavera, queste in Jolla volteggiano qua, queue là; cosifitte le schiere dalle navi e dalle tende lungo la riva bassa si disponevano in file, affollandosi all’assemblea; tra lorofiammeggiava Ia Fama, messaggera di Zeus, spin gendoli a andare: quelli serravano. Tumultuava l’assemblea; Ia terra gemeva, sotto, mentre i soldati sedevano; v’era chwtsso. E nove araldi, urlando, ii trattenevano, se mai la voce abbassassero, ascoltassero i re alunni de Zeus. A stento infine sederte 1 ‘esercito, furon tenuti a posto, smettendo ii voclo.

Omero

Iliade

 

 

 

Homer

Ilias

 

 

 

Gomer

Iliada

 

 

	Ce/a di:, ii quitre le premier le Conseil. Sur quoi les autres se lèvent: tous les rois porteurs de sceptre obêissent au pasteur d’hommes. Les homes déjà accourent. Comme on volt les abeilles, par troupes compactes, sortir d’un afire creux, àflots toujours nouveaux, pour former une grappe, qui bientôt voltige au-dessus des fleurs du printemps, tandis que beaucoup d’autres s’en vont voletant, les unes par-cl, les autres par-là; ainsi, des nefs et des baraques, des troupes sans nombre viennent se ranger, par groupes serrés, en avant du rivage bas, pour prendre part a 1 ‘assemblée, Parmi elles, Rumeur, messagère de Zeus, est k qui flambe et les pousse a marcher, jusqu ‘au moment oà tous se trouvent réunis. L ‘assemblée est houleuse; le so! gemit sous les guerriers occupés a s’asseoir; le tumulte règne. Neuf hérauts, en criant, tâchent a contenir la foule: ne pourrait-elle arrêter sa clameur, pour écouter les rois issus de Zeus! Ce n ‘est pas sans peine que les hommes s ‘asseoient et qu ‘enfin us consentent

a demeurer en place, tous cris cessant.

 

	[442—The Greek (Homer), Italian (Rosa Calzecchi Onesti), German (Johann Heinrich Voss), Russian (Gnedich), and French (Paul Mazon) all refer to the same passage: “On this he turned and led the way from council,! and all the rest, staff-bearing counselors,! rose and obeyed their marshaL From the camp! the troops were turning now, thick as bees/ that issue from some crevice In a rock face! endlessly pouring forth, to make a cluster! and swarm on blooms of summer here and there,! glinting and droning, busy in bright air.! Like bees innumerable from ships and huts! down the deep foreshore streamed those regiments! toward the assembly ground—and Rumor blazed! among them like a crier sent from Zeus. Turmoil grew in the great field as they entered! and sat down, clangorous companies, the ground / under them groaning, hubbub everywhere./ Now nine men, criers, shouted to compose them: / Quiet! Quiet! Attention! Hear our captains!’! / Then all strove to their seats and hushed their din.” As translated by Robert Fitzgerald. The Iliad (Garden City, New York: Anchor Books, 1975), p. 38. — Ed.]

Homère

Iliade

 

 

 

	Through Wisdom Is An House Builded And By Understanding It Is Established And By Knowledge Shall The Chambers Be Filled With All Precious And Pleasant Riches.

University of Virginia

commemorative plaque

 

 

 

As I dig for wild orchids

in the autumn fields,

it is the deeply-bedded root

that I desire,

not the flower.

Izumi Shikibu

 

 

 

	Dicamus et labyrinthos, vel porrentosissimum humani inpendii opus, sed flon, Ut existimari potest, falsum. [443— “We must speak also of the labyrinths, the most astonishing work of human riches. but not, as one might think, fictitious.” — Ed.]

Pliny

Natural History

36.19.84

 

 

 

	Philosophy is written in this grand book—I mean the universe—which stands continually open to our gaze, but it cannot be understood unless one first learns to comprehend the language and interpret the characters in which it is written. It is written in the language of mathematics, and its characters are triangles, circles and other geometrical figures, without which it is humanly impossible to understand a single word of it; without these, one is wandering about in a dark labyrinth.

Galileo

II Saggiatore

 

 

 

	Others apart sat on a hill retir’d,

	In thoughts more elevate, and reason’d high

	Of Providence, foreknowledge, will, and fate,

	Fix’d fate, free will, foreknowledge absolute,

	And found no end, in wand’ring mazes lost.

	John Milton

	Paradise Lost

 

 

 

	It is the personality of the mistress that the home expresses. Men are forever guests in our homes, no matter how much happiness they may find there.

Elise De Wolfe

The House in Good Taste

 

 

 

La maison, c ‘est l.a maison de famille, C ‘est pour y mettre les enfants er les hommes, pour les retenir dans un endroit fait pour eux, pour y contenir leur égaremenr, les distraire de cetie humeur d’aventure, defuite qui est Ia leur depuis les commencements des ages. [444—“A house means a faintly house, a place specially meant for putting children and men In so as to restrict their waywardness and distract them from the longing for adventure and escape they’ve had since time began.” As translated by Barbara Bray in Duras’ Practicaittles (New York: Grove, 1990), p. 42. — Ed.]

Marguerite Duras

Practicalities

 

 

 

 

	L’homme se cr0 it un héros, toujours comme l’enfant. L’homme aime la guerre, la chasse, Ia pêche, les motos, les autos, comme l’enfant. Quand ii don, ca se voit, et on aime les hommes comme Ca, les femmes. II tie faut pas se mentir là-dessus. Cz aime les hommes innocents, cruels, on aime les chasseurs, les guerriers, on aime les enfants. [445— “Men think they’re heroes—again Just like children. Men love war, hunting, fishing, motorbikes, cars, Just like children. When they’re sleepy you can see It. And women like men to be like that. We mustn’t fool ourselves. We like men to be innocent and cruel; we like hunters and warriors; we like children.” Duras again, as translated by Barbara Bray, p. 51. — Ed.]

Marguerite Duras

Practicalities again

 

 

 

	The only wife for me now is the damp earth… Heho-ho!… The grave that is!… Here my son’s dead and I am alive… It’s a strange thing, death has come in at the wrong door.

Anton Chekhov again

“Misery”

 

 

 

	lam cinis, adhuc tamen rarus. Respicio: densa coiigo tergis imminebat, quae nos torrentis modo infusa terive sequebarur. “Dejiectamus” inquam “than videmus, ne in via strati comitantium turba in tenebris obteramur.” Vix consideramus, et nox non qualis inlunis aut nublia, sed qualis in locis clausis lumine exstincto. [446— “Ashes were already falling, not as yet very thickly. I looked round: a dense black cloud was coming up behind us, spreading over the earth like a flood. ‘Let us leave the road while we can still see,’ I said, ‘or we shall be knocked down and trampled underfoot in the dark by the crowd behind.’ We had scarcely sat down to rest when darkne fell, not the dark of a moonleas or oloudy night, but aa if the lamp had been put out in a closed room.” As translated by Betty Radice, Pliny: Letters and Panegyricus. Volume 1 (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1969), p. 445.—Ed.]

Young Pliny again

 

 

 

	He turned his stare towards me, and he led me away to the palace of Irkalla, the Queen of Darkness, to the house from which none who enters ever returns, down the road from which there is no coming back.

“There is the house whose people sit in darkness; dust is their food and clay their meat. They are clothed like birds with wings for covering, they see no light, they sit in darkness. .

The Epic of Gilgamesh

 

 

 

 

 

	The Mother of the Muses, we are taught,

	Is Memory: she has left me.

Walter Savage Landor

“Memory”

 

 

 

	Far off from these a slow and silent stream,

	Lethe the River of Oblivion rolls

	Her wat’ry Labyrinth, whereof who drinks,

	Forthwith his former state and being forgets,

	Forgets both joy and grief, pleasure and pain.

Paradise Lost again

 

 

 

	The comets

	Have such a space to cross,

 

Such coldness, forgetfulness.

	So your gestures flake off —

 

	Warm and human, then their pink light

	Bleeding and peeling

 

	Through the black amnesias of heaven.

Sylvia Plath

“The Night Dances”

 

 

 

	Gilgamesh listened and his tears flowed. He opened his mouth and spoke to Enkidu: “Who is there in strong-walled Uruk who has wisdom like this? Strange things have been spoken, why does your heart speak strangely? The dream was marvelous but the terror was great; we must treasure the dream whatever the terror; for the dream has shown that misery comes at last to the healthy man, the end of life is sorrow…”

Again The Epic of Gilgamesh

 

 

 

	I am missing innumerable shades—they were so fine, so difficult to render in colourless words.

Joseph Teodor Korzeniowski

Lord Jim

 

 

 

	Hige sceal Je heardra, heorte e cënre, mod sceal J>e mare, Jë Ure mzgen ltla [447—By as much as our might may diminish, we will harden our minds, fill our hearts, and Increase our courage.” — Ed.]

The Battle of Maldon

 

 

 

 

	I wished to show that space-time is not necessarily something to which one can ascribe a separate existence, independently of the actual objects of physical reality. Physical objects are not in space, but these objects are spatially extended. In this way the concept of “empty space” loses its meaning.

Albert Einstein

“Note to the Fifteenth Edition”

Relativity: The Special and General Theory

 

 

 

	Let us space.

Jacques Demda

Glas

 

 

 

	L ‘odeur du silence ext si vieille. [448— “The odor of silence Is so old.” — Ed.]

O. W. De L. Milosz

 

 

 

	For all the voice in answer he could wake

	Was but the mocking echo of his own

	From some tree-hidden cliff across the lake.

	Some morning from the boulder-broken beach

	He would cry out on life, that what it wants

	Is not its own love back in copy speech,

	But counter-love, original response.

	And then in the far-distant water splashed,

	But after a time allowed for it to swim,

	Instead of proving human when it neared

	And someone else additional to him,

	As a great buck it powerfully appeared,

	Pushing the crumpled water up ahead…

Robert Frost

“The Most of It”

 

 

 

	All that I have said and done,

	Now that I am old and ill,

	Turns into a question till

	I lie awake night after night

	And never get the answers right.

	Did that play of mind send out

	Certain men the English shot?

	Did words of mine put too great strain

	On that woman’s reeling brain?

	Could my spoken words have checked

	That whereby a house lay wrecked?

William Butler Yeats

“Man and the Echo”

 

 

 

 

	Have not we too?—yes, we have

	Answers, and we know not whence;

	Echoes from beyond the grave,

	Recognised intelligence!

 

	Such rebounds our inward ear

	Catches sometimes from afar —

	Listen, ponder, hold them dear;

	For of God,—of God they are.

William Wordsworth

“Yes, It Was the Mountain Echo”

 

 

 

	“Love should be put into action!”

	screamed the old hermit.

	Across the pond an echo

	tried and tried to confirm it.

Elizabeth Bishop

“Chemin de Fer”

 

 

 

	When I came back from death

	it was morning

	the back door was open

	and one of the buttons of my shirt had

disappeared.

Derick Thomson

Return from Death

 

 

 

	Thou Echo, thou art mortal, all men know.

	Echo. No.

	Wert thou not born among the trees and leaves?

	Echo. Leaves.

	And are there any leaves, that still abide?

	Echo. Bide.

	What leaves are they? impart the matter wholly.

	Echo. Holy.

	Are holy leaves the Echo then of blisse?

	Echo. Yes.

	Then tell me, what is that supreme delight?

	Echo. Light.

George Herbert

“Heaven”

 

 

 

	L ‘amour n ‘est pas consolation, ii est lumière.” [449— “Love is not consolation, it Is light.” — Ed.]

Simone Weil

Cahier VI (K6)

 

 

 

 

	Of what is this house composed if not of the sun.

Wallace Stevens

“An Ordinary Evening in New Haven”

 

 

 

	We tell you, tapping on our brows,

	The story as it should be, —

	As if the story of a house

	Were told, or ever could be.

Edwin Arlington Robinson

“Eros Turannos”

 

 

 

	Should not every apartment in which man dwells be lofty enough to create some obscurity overhead, where flickering shadows may play at evening about the rafters?

Henry David Thoreau

Walden

 

 

 

	Werjetzt kein Haus hat, baut sich keines mehr. [450— “Whoever has no house now, will never have one.” — Ed.]

Rainer Maria Rilke

“Autumn Day”

 

 

 

	I have brought the great bail of crystal;

		who can lift it?

	Can you enter the great acorn of light?

		But the beauty is not the madness

	Tho’ my errors and wrecks lie about me.

	And I am not a demigod,

	I cannot make it cohere.

	If love be not in the house there is nothing.

Ezra Pound

“Canto CXVI”

 

 

 

	Yeah well, sometimes nothing can be a real cool hand.

Donn Pearce and Frank R. Pierson

Cool Hand Luke